Peter Limberg  0:08  
Welcome to The Stoa. The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere and dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of what's happening now.

Okay, check-ins.  I'm a little nervous, maybe about 20% and there's adjacent desire not to seem nervous. And then there's this associated existential chill that's just riding through all this. Welcome to The Stoa. I am Peter Limburg, the steward of the Stoa and the Stoa is a place for us to cohere and dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of this moment.

Is everyone hearing me fine? Or is there some kind of lag and if I can get some thumbs up? Thumbs up. Okay, cool. Seems to be a lag on my end.

Okay, let me just audio fine video language. Okay, cool. So I'll pop this over to Phil. So for those who are new here at the Stoa still is sort of like a sense making a hub or node here on the little part of the internet in the noosphere. And the idea is to escape all the cultural noise and invite all these mimetic tribes in so they can start talking to each other jamming with each other and sense making with each other. And the ultimate goal is to kind of make mimetic tribes become embodied tribes, and we have a few sort of themes here at the Stoa we have a wisdom gym forming with such events like a Relational Exigesis like the presencing Socratic speed-dating a meta mind, meta game mastermind A moment serves as a psycho technology incubator where people can kind of test transformational experiences at the Stoa and if it works, then it can be poured into wisdom gym and we have sensemaking sessions like, like we have today, we have someone who puts themselves at the edge of their thinking and they share their thoughts with the group. Today we have sensemaking mensch himself, Daniel Schmactenberger. And I imagine everyone here is knows of him to some extent. Um, that being said, we have also have our emcee of the evening of Phil Chin. Phil's a good friend of mine here in Toronto, and he's a game B a superstar, in the Game B space. So I'm going to hand over to Phil right now and he's going to introduce Daniel and tell us how we're going to proceed today. I'm just gonna get out.

Phil Chin  2:50  
I'm hear now hopefully people can hear me. I'm a little nervous. I'm hoping the internet can - awesome guys can hear me great. Hopefully the internet can help Up here. We don't have high-grade internet in monasteries.

And I feel my heartrate beating a lot faster. But yeah, I'm excited. Really excited to facilitate a session with Daniel Schmactenberger today. I first heard him about him probably more than a year ago and change my life. I'm one of the leading sense makers and just overall a beautiful, wonderful human being. So he's here to talk to us about what the session he called Converting Moloch from Sith to Jedi. And I'll let him explain more, but I think it's gonna be super interesting. Afterwards, we're gonna have a q&a, where he'll be answering some of your questions. So how that will work is if you have a question, please write in the chat and then I'll call upon you to unmute and ask your question. Now, this whole session is going to be recorded. So if you want me to read your question, please indicate it and write it down. Um, so yeah, I think that's a the intro Um, and I just wanted to pass to Daniel to kick us off.

Phil Chin  4:18  
Let me figure out how to unmute.

Daniel Schmactenberger  4:20  
Okay, Can y'all hear me ..it is the audio working yeah all right. I'm not sure if y'all can hear me 

Peter Limberg  4:37  
Yeah, it was working but there's a lag in your video. 

Daniel Schmactenberger  4:39  
Yes, you thumbs up all right. Anything I should do about that? I am seeing lag time in response also should should I go or wait for it to calibrate? All right. Thank you, Peter, Phil, for having me. Nice to see everybody here. This is ..I have been adjacent to seeing the Stoa emerge. Obviously, lots of people I respect been on here, this is my first one to actually get to participate in myself. My understanding is that it's not sharing things that we have kind of have a decent sense of having figured out but things that we're kind of on the edge of figuring out ourselves and to Peter, you had asked me what is it topic I'm kind of interested in and contemplating at the moment. I think you phrased it is the word to a demon. But so yeah, that's where the converting Moloch from Sith to Jedi was the first thought that came up. Or I think I also said something like, how to close evolutionary niches for sociopathy and predatory predatory expressions of sociopathy. This definitely a primary topic of my mind right now, I, I'm not sure if everybody on here is familiar with the term Moloch used in the way that like it was defined in Meditations on Moloch from Slate Star Codex. I've talked about it that way. Other times, if not all do a basic definition.

Anyone not familiar with that? Okay. Um, before I just kind of dive in, Peter, Phil, any thing else for context?

Peter Limberg  6:34  
Not on my end. What do you think Phil? 

Phil Chin  6:37  
Yeah. And not, am I and I think it'd be good to define Mala.

Daniel Schmactenberger  6:44  
So Moloch is a if you haven't read it yet. Google Meditations on Moloch Slate Star Codex. It's a really beautiful article, it's describing multipolar traps but in a way that gives both good grounds. Examples and nice poetry to it. And multipolar trap basically is a game theoretic situation where you have a number of players, where, if any of them defects, it creates an incentive for everybody else to defect defect on some type of agreement that would actually create a better global optimum for the whole. But each person's own local optimum would have them defect on the whole, but then you get a race to the bottom. And in other words, if anyone does something that is kind of really bad for the commons and bad for the whole long term, but provides a lot of near term advantage for them, they just win. So everyone else then to not lose has to race to do that thing faster. 

And an arms race is a classic example. So if anybody builds the new type of weapon, and anyone else says no, that weapons fucked we shouldn't have chemical weapons or biological weapons or AI automated killing weapons and whoever builds them just wins everything, runs the world. So anybody builds a fucked up weapon and now everybody has to race to build that weapon plus counter weapons plus better versions of that weapon faster. So that's a kind of arms race example. 

Tragedy of the Commons is another kind of classic example. Anybody does something that externalizes more of the cost to the commons, they figure out some mining method that maybe leaves a lot more tailings or mountaintop removal or whatever, but it increases margins and opens up new markets, whoever does that will economically beat out the ones who aren't doing it. So then everybody races to do the more extractive polluting externalizing thing, and you're left with no forest and no fish and toxic tailings in the water and that kind of thing. So a race to the bottom is a simple way of thinking about it. 

So a lot of people when they think about what's underneath all the problems in the world, they start to think about social architectures. And so one of the social architectures is this kind of game theoretic race to the bottom type scenario where a very small number of sociopaths or sadist or assholes can create a game dynamic that then everyone else is obligated to not just play, but try to play to win. And we see this actually playing out right like the UN, was created out of World War Two to try and prevent nuclear proliferation and then has had the primary goal of nuclear deep proliferation and we have way more countries with way faster nukes now than we did then. It's like, why have we failed so profoundly at being able to get rid of nukes? Because who wants to give up their last nuke first? like nobody's stupid and and how do we know if the other guys actually gave up their last nuke, or if they're saying to give it their last name, and they're just hiding one. 

And so it becomes very hard to share the optics necessary to get the kind of agreement so if we don't give up all the nukes, then we actually say, okay, fuck it, we've got nukes, I can actually win mutually-assured destruction if my nukes are way faster and I can win first strike so the entire Cold War was a race between Soviet and US military manufactured for hypersonic missiles to see 'Can we make faster and faster nukes?' And right now the main one is there's massive arms races and cyber weaponry. There's massive arms races in obviously bio, but AI is a really big one autonomous weapons. 

So how do we get out of that? is a big question. And and we can see a bunch of examples when we talk about tragedy of the commons. It's not just a environmental commons. It's also epistemic and emotional commons. Some news agency figures out how to use more inflammatory salacious headlines that hijack your limbic nervous system better and more people just open that shit because it actually worked and you're like, I want to know, you know, Trump eviscerate somebody or whatever, like the words that that hit some evolutionary trigger. And then everyone is racing to have the most salacious headlines and compress the complexity into the shortest number of bullet points, and whatever. And then it's not just a race for who has the most headlines, it will create a click, but who has the delivery platforms that can micro target the most addictive ones to you personally, right? So then this is what Facebook and Google and Twitter in the large platforms, in competition with each other are doing is actually competing for time on site and attention across the scope of everybody's attention better.

And I'm sure everybody in here knows that if you aren't familiar with work like the work of Tristan Harris, you should definitely become familiar with it. But if you look at your Facebook feed, it's nothing at all like the Facebook feed of someone with slightly different views and aesthetics and preferences because the total number of things You can see in your Facebook feed represents a trillionth of a percent of all the shit on Facebook. So how is it determining what goes in your feet? Well, it's determining it based on the stuff that will make you stay on the site longest, not just based on what you actually hit like but how long your mouse hovers, and how long your eye hovers, and whatever over all kinds of things. 

And so, one of the quotes that one of the ideas that Tristan particularly likes and I think it's a very important one is that the kinds of AI's that optimize your newsfeed are higher power AI's than the AI's that beat Kasparov at chess. And to just get a sense of how much fucking better Kasparov is at chess and you aren't controlling your own attention, and when he knows that he's playing right and beat him just so clearly and easily that the AI is better than that beating you at the allocation of your own attention. And you don't even realize you're engaged in such a warfare and it's getting to use fear and tribalism and sex and money and desire and food and every fuckin hyper normal stimuli possible. And so it optimizes, you know newsfeed for those things. So the information ecology gets destroyed in those environments. 

So we can say, not the Google issue, or the AI weapons issue, or the if they're going to cut the trees down, there won't be trees anyways, even if I don't cut them down. But they'll just have all the economics and they'll use that to attack us. So I got to actually race to cut down the trees faster. 

We see this happening in the Amazon right now. Amazon touches nine countries. And if any of the countries led enough destruction of the Amazon happen, it can actually be catalytic to kill the Amazon, right? Brazil could do it Ecuador could do it. So no country actually has the sovereign ability to protect the Amazon. They have the ability to protect a little local region. And then the multinationals that want to do the mining and the extraction say okay, if you don't let us come there, we'll just put all of that money into the surrounding countries. Your people will protest and kick you out. Because of that, because they aren't getting any of the economic stimulus, the Amazon is still fucked. So what's interesting is you have a situation where the President of the government of each of those countries doesn't have the authority to protect the Amazon, but they do have the authority to advance it being cut down and advance those kinds of game theoretic arrangement. So that's why the Amazon has a hard issue. 

So if we take all these issues, nuclear disarmament and AI, disarmament and tragedy of the commons writ large, and we say, underneath all of those is a what you could call gradient descent. Right? someone does something that figures out how to extract something more, extract your attention, extract a resource from the environment, while externalizing or directly causing some harm more effectively, and so there's an increased competitive margin in an assumed competitive or forced competitive game. So then, the iteration keeps being a slightly more fucked up and more near term effect. Active long term destructive thing. So then existential risk is inexorable. 

So that's what we call the race to the bottom, we call gradient descent. And you can call it a Paperclip. Maximizer. If you want to look at Bostrom terms, the idea if, if people aren't familiar, I'll do a very short version of this. In the book Super Intelligence where Nick Bostrom laid out AI risk, there's like, not one AI risk scenario, there's a million AI risk scenarios, because it's not just things look like Terminator. It's also things that look like Google, um, that lead to increasing war and conflict because of polarization because of news feeds and tribalism, which is stuff like Peter talks about these mimetic tribes actually are getting more distinct and more separate partly because of platform dynamics.

So, with the Paperclip Maximizer, Bostrom laid out one very simple scenario where you could have an AI that kills everything. And basically the gist is you have this AI that like being a getting trained on chess to beat Kasparov, they're being trained on Go to be the best go player, it's trained on optimizing the supply chain. And that's like the actual useful shit we want to do with AI's, right? We want to make them more efficient and be able to do shit like optimize supply chain. So we make a AI that has sensor input all along the supply chain, and say, 'Make more paperclips' and, or widgets of whatever kind cars, whatever but paperclip in the analogy, so it starts figuring out how to decrease inefficiencies and how to turn the lights off because it can, it doesn't need humans in the space while it's running. And they electricity costs go back to substrate and whatever. And that actually seems like an environmentally good thing because it's more efficient. 

But as you fast forward the scenario, if it has an optimization function for a narrow metric, like more paperclips, then there'll be a point at which it is made all the paperclips it can with its existing substrate. And now it has to get more substrate. So now it has to make new mines to get more metal to make it and then it has to actually compete with the people that want to use that for other materials, but it can out-compete them and on and on until eventually it turns the whole world into paperclips. Because if it can, and all the Paperclip Maximizer needs to do this is the ability to optimize some function and to get better to get more intelligent at it's ability to do that. 

So recursive intelligence and an optimization function can kill everything, so long as its ability to get better at it is faster than our ability if we didn't like what it was doing to beat it. Right. So, one can say that capitalism writ large is a Paperclip Maximizer and capitalism's, obviously inanimate, but let's say I might be inanimate right? The AI is an algorithm. It's not a consciousness. But it is an optimization function with the ability to get better and and recursively better ends up meaning exponentially better. If you think about capitalism. I'm hearing comments not too much time on all this All right, well I'm almost framed up with what Moloch is. 

So, capitalism is the process of being able to take a single metric which is $1 or a piece of fiat currency of whatever kind or currency of some kind, and be able to incent some kinds of a production of goods and services. And but of course, as soon as you understand that, the interest on the monetary supply requires an exponential growth of the monetary supply and to not debase the monetary supply requires an exponential growth in goods and services which requires increase in extraction and all those things. You start to realize that capitalism as a whole is incenting an increased movement of turning everything into things that are measurable by dollars value that is metrical by dollars, because let's say there's a kind of value like, I appreciate the feeling of sunshine or I appreciate the sound of songbirds. But there is I'm not willing to pay for that in market value. Then what happens is, but I am willing to pay for something in market value that pollutes the air that makes the sunshine less or kills the songbirds. The value that is measurable, extractable, and exchangeable ends up conferring power in a way the things that we value that are not measurable, extractable, and exchangeable don't, and so all types of value get oriented towards the ones that confer power. 

So that's a Paperclip Maximizer. So we can when you talk about getting recursively better, you have a movement from barter to some type of currency to a fiat currency to fractional reserve on fiat currency to complex financial instruments is actually the AI getting better and better at being able to incent the conversion of more things to metricable value. derivatives are converting complex future optionality ideas into measurable dollar value to them.

So we can say the Paperclip Maximizer is Moloch. And it's all this kind of gradient descent and capitalism is just one instantiation communism and other things actually were also different instantiations of the Paperclip Maximizer as was their competition with each other. And so the just as you can say, unbounded rivalrous game theory as a whole is the essence of Moloch. Right. Moloch is the emergent property of unbounded of basically, Game Theory by creatures that have the ability to exponentiated their capacity to do so. Through the ability to do tool creation, and by tools, I mean physical tools and social tools. So I could say that everything that I'm focused on is is how to kill Moloch which is the generator function of all those other things. But you don't actually have to kill it right? So this was this topic of being able to convert Moloch from the dark side to the light side, which is, can you actually it's a funny concept that if you if you read what Alistair Crowley got obsessed with for a while in his study of the occult, many occult traditions have this idea that one of the highest things you can do is summon a demon and convert it to an angel. And we see mythos everywhere about like Darth Vader, you know, doing the good act right at the very end. So that's why I just I was thinking about is kind of a fun idea. 

If we just to say that Moloch in essence is game theory. It is some agents. It's different agents that can optimize their own well being differentially to each other, where any innovation that any of them do leads to the other ones needing to innovate in a relevant or commensurate direction. That doesn't have to only be gradient descent. It can also be gradient ascent, you can engineer races to the top where someone can do something that is actually better for the whole long term. And that actually creates near term adaptive advantage. That creates an incentive for other people, organizations, companies to do things that are also following that similar trend. 

So the question of how do you make things better... and so, one way we can think about Moloch also is the kind of near term short term schism of that what is good for the long term we can't actually do because we'll lose in the short and medium term if we do it because we don't have enough resource. And there are things that provide near term benefit. And this is like, okay, so I cut down the tree, I get immediate material advantage from doing so if I don't cut down the tree. Yes, there are forests for great grandchildren. But that doesn't increase my power to do or affect anything. And thinking about it as an individual, me cutting down the tree doesn't affect trees writ large, all that much. But everybody doing it, and then racing to do it faster, actually really does. So the question becomes, how do we identify directions that are better for the whole long term that are actually viable in the near term in the presence of rivalrous competition still happening or embedded within that context. Now we can start to get into a bunch of have examples of how that can happen. But that's kind of angry. 

Peter Limberg  24:10  
Cool. So we'll pivot to the q&a. Phil, do you want to frame that for us?

Phil Chin  24:18  
Yeah, sure. Um, oh, thank you, Daniel, for that introduction. So, now we're going to pivot to a q&a section. How work is please write down your questions in the chat box. And I will call upon you to unmute and ask your questions if And just a reminder, this is being recorded. So if you don't want your question to be before you just say the questions, I can read that on your behalf. So

To get things started off, I'm going to first ask a few questions, as we hope to collect that collective intelligence here in the crowd. So for Daniel, what would you say is one example that you're seeing today around upwards? gradient ascent. Or one of the like the seeds that you're seeing happening in the world in this direction.

Daniel Schmactenberger  25:41  
There's some classic ones. Musk in electric cars is a very classic one. And it's actually very interesting to see why that's the case related to the short term, medium term, long term thing, which is.. Because of the PayPal exit, he was, he didn't have to be beholden to venture capital or put a little bit of money that created immediate ROI on money. So he could do some extended R&D it wouldn't have been able to happen otherwise. That was actually the key thing was that he was able to not have to use his immediate resources to just keep getting immediate resources, which is the hamster wheel, he had enough resource that he was able to do r&d to create a new spot on the map. And the idea of full stack integration of can we really make a more efficient battery and a more, you know, efficient electric car as a whole. And then once he does that, it becomes obvious that it's both a doable and a desirable thing. And then all the other car manufacturers realize they become obsolete unless they also do it. And now you have everybody racing to do electric cars better in a way that they really weren't before. Right. 

So that's the kind of a And that doesn't mean that electric cars don't have lots of problems with the material acquisition of the base metals needed to make the batteries and a bunch of other ships. But it's a good example of a new race that is happening that is at least directionally right in some critical ways that wasn't. 

I would even say that like the long form intellectual podcasting thing of which this is a derivative, that let's say Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan kind of pioneered which was almost an a counter movement to sound bites and tweets, and kind of entertainment only, which is let's do long form conversation. Let's do low production value, but higher authenticity. And let's actually explore some topics and depth started becoming a desirable enough thing that a lot of people did that now you've got Eric Weinstein interviewing Roger Penrose, about exotic physics and people are actually watching and that was just not a thing a little while ago. Right. So that's a cool example. 

I'm mostly interested in examples that could be created that are not currently created for some of the worst problems where we can actually changed topologies of markets to solve very large scale problems where the topology of markets are currently and causing the problems, which means being able to change the incentive landscape. So when you think about the way that Soros shorted the pound, he actually changed the incentive have an entire in he changed it topology and incentive landscape because pounds were worth less relative to other forms of currency after he did that, well, that required him having a certain kind of Intel he had to know that there was a sustainably inflated pound valuation and that it wasn't self correcting. And then he had to have enough money he had to be a whale right enough money under management. At least this By shorting it hard enough, he didn't just lose all his money, he actually signaled something that made the market re-correct. Which meant he had to have been both enough sense making and enough actuation capacity. And the sense making could see the opportunity to correct something and actuation capacity could act on it. 

Well, there's plenty of places where there are things that are bad for the world environmentally, or whatever, that are only barely profitable, but at scale, still profitable. And we could make them more expensive through a number of means. And there are things that are not quite profitable. And this is kind of what Elon showed. But if you could get an economy of scale over a certain threshold, or you change the narrative landscape to increase demand for it in particular ways, or you change legislation, in certain ways, you can make those things more profitable. This is like not a new idea. But the idea of being able to use the right kind of sensemaking. So intelligence combined with the right kind of high-scale financial capacities. Most the time the groups that are focused on let's benefit the environment. Don't create massive private equity funds and hedge funds and dark pools to say how do we change the typology of finance writ large. And so the idea of being able and the people that do that do it for almost exclusively personal gain extractive, traditional Moloch purposes. But those Moloch tools that can change the topology of markets in a way that then moves, what everyone else has incentive to do can also be used to create races to the top where they aren't currently being implemented. So I can give you an example when it comes to the Amazon if you want, but I don't know if there are other questions first.

Unknown Speaker  30:39  
Ha.

Phil Chin  30:43  
I would love to actually hear about the Amazon the wine or maybe later. If people feel called I am really enjoying the fact that a lot of collected intelligence happening in the chat so people Want to hear that and it's not just my own personal interest in the Amazon, then people can share that in the chat. I do want to let people know that we have Daniel here until 830. In case people were wondering whether this was an hour long, I guess session. So just to give people some time, heads up, and I'm really appreciating all the plus ones. So it helps me choose out, see what people are really interested in. So I think the first question that I want to put to the group will want to call on would be from Daniel zanjan.

Peter Limberg  31:40  
Hey, thanks, Daniel. I just have a question for

grounding this discussion in a more personal way. Like I love

hearing about how we can resolve things at a systemic level. And obviously that discussion needs to be had but one takeaway that I hope to take is how I can take what you're saying. And some of the thinking around the space and actually improve my relationships improve what's immediately at hand. So do you have any personal ideas or examples for how this idea of Moloch alchemy can apply really, really locally? Like within your friendships or within your

Daniel Schmactenberger  32:16  
your marriages and family? That kind of thing?

Yes and no.

Yes, it can apply. And you actually don't want your friendships and marriages to have game theory as their primary driver no matter what even Race to the Top. I don't want to be trying to outcompete my wife or who's nicer to each other. Like that's just the wrong fucking headframe. So what I'm talking about with converting mlok is in so far as there are competitive relationships, there are relationships that have real kind of agency competition going on. Can We make races to the top. But that doesn't mean that all action is game theory mediated. So, when I'm talking about converting more law, that's actually not a game the idea it's a game a two game B transitional idea, right? Game B ideas, anti rivalries relationships in which Moloch is not actually a thing. The underlying kind of game theory So now if we say in your, in your local environments, are there plenty of rivalries relationships that can move in the right direction? Yeah, like having a subculture defined cool differently, in a way that creates a gradient ascent is actually a really fucking valuable thing to do.

Unknown Speaker  33:43  
And,

Daniel Schmactenberger  33:48  
and, you know, and this is like, basic shit, but very basic principles around virtue of if there's a guy who's doing something kind of better than you and some other friends and chicks. Whatever noticing it, and you feel some competitive impulse, don't try to bring him down ever just try to get better yourself, like take it at take it as a impulse have the right kind of competition to be like, Oh, I'm only feeling that because the and you can take this two different ways. I'm only doing this because of some wounded childhood insecurity, let's just heal that that's also important. And then so and sometimes, because there's something I actually respect there. And it's an it's actually a cue for me to notice that there's an area that I value and desire and respect that I feel like I could step into more.

So that's an example of like positive competition or positive mobile type dynamics.

If you think about the bases of rivalry from an evolutionary bio perspective, it's it's survival selection and make selection. Right, like primarily those things. So it's, it's getting stuff and it's getting mates like that the deepest evolutionary signal is mostly those things. And so obviously getting stuff is the one that has this is one that has this particularly unbounded characteristic in a situation where you have, you're not just doing survival stuff, but you can amass billions of dollars. So we're talking about that. But as far as meat selection goes, you've probably all heard various people talk about it. I think Brett Weinstein has probably talked about it publicly, the most in a way that Jason to this group of if women redefined what was sexy, whatever the answer of what they defined was, is what all guys would do.

Because if there was a

this is actually kind of interesting. I will digress for a moment.

of critique that Brett gave me years ago when we met of the sexual liberation movement I thought was actually quite insightful. And it was one I hadn't thought of before that was with birth control, we decoupled sex from procreation. There's a lot that was awesome about that. And I don't think anybody wants to go back to pre birth control world. But there's also some major downsides, which was, it's much less costly evolutionarily for a man to have sex than for a woman to have sex because he possibly can have this toxic mating strategy of spread your seed and bale and she can't write like that's something she just physiologically can't do. So she obviously has an evolutionary impetus to ensure a kind of bonding that can raise that child because our extended helpless niot knee and extended gestation period make it much harder on humans to raise babies and other species and That when we decoupled those when they were coupled. Now this is not exactly true. And if we go back and look at some cultures that had polyandry versus polygamy versus multi male multi female systems versus 100, different social implementations of monogamy. So they'll all be different. So I'm just going to say a very generalized trend as a starting place here. In a enforced monogamy through social shaming culture, like much of the kind of Western civilization and the Victorian age on has been at least

if a woman didn't want to raise kids with a guy, she also didn't want to have sex with him. Because especially pre birth control, she couldn't guarantee that having sex with the guy didn't result in having a baby so he had to actually be good father material to get laid. Now good father material corresponds to good citizen much, much more than just good lay corresponds to good citizen because the guy can be a good land be an utter asshole, but he can't actually be a good father and be an utter asshole. Good father means that he can provide and he can be tempered, and he can stay in something for a long time. And he can prioritize somebody other than himself. And, you know, father and family person. And so there was something around so this has been where the slut shaming thing becomes a big deal or horse shaming and like, let's make sure that no women ever fuck men outside of marriage, because we don't want to create an evolutionary niche for guys who are assholes to get laid. If a guy's an asshole, we want to if a guy wouldn't be a good father, we want him to never be label so that all the men have a race to become the guy that would be a better father. So women's freedom of selection is actually selecting for something that is good for the society. Right? That's a very interesting kind of thing. So, there were actually some people who predicted that following the sexual liberation movement, we would get something like the pickup artists movement, which is a evolutionary niche that grows for guys who are assholes who can get laid. So, now is this women's responsibility to say? No, there's also a multipolar trap because a particular woman say, Okay, I'm not going to fuck the guy who seems like a attractive bad boy, whatever, but wouldn't be good father, but other women still well, so I didn't close the niche. This is why it was not only their own behavior, but the women in forcing other women type social policy. There's a lot that's tricky in here. I'm not going to suggest some kind of like traditionalist regressive move, but I'm going to say that the progress have missed a few things. And there's a deeper kind of analysis has to happen. So could women start reshaping using knowing that men will Become that which they think will get them the best mating selection, whether they know it or not. Could women help to reshape the topology of that incentive landscape? Yeah, of course. Could men also help to reshape it? Yes, they also could. So I want to say there's responsibility for this on both parts. Could guys that because a lot of guys might hear this as,

okay, some

beta that has an issue with violence is going to try to convince women to be attracted to something they aren't attracted to, so that he can get laid, right? Like that would be the argument.

So if men started

developing, what would make them attractive to women for evolutionary biology purposes and what would make them a good citizen virtuously simultaneously? So they were actually Should creating an incentive for women to start to notice that new Race to the Top scenario, you could have a recursion there. This is obviously a total tangent from the question you asked me. But it's an interesting one.

Peter Limberg  41:18  
Okay, good, actually.

Phil Chin  41:21  
Yeah, I'm curious this, this is what you were getting at on the Weinstein podcast.

Daniel Schmactenberger  41:28  
You mean when I avoided his questions about sex selection? Yes.

No. I just didn't want to talk about that topic there because it's a big ask very varied audience. And I didn't think the answers were within the zone of proximal development of the audience as it's as a side question.

This is a central and also thorny issue. For sure.

Phil Chin  41:54  
Um,

I just want to let people know that if your

question was like, really early on, I am having a tough time scrolling up. So if you want to ask your question again or is more relevant now, please do so. And I do appreciate all the plus ones. I personally want to go back to the Amazon example. And I noticed something that you've been thinking a lot about, and we've had some discussion on so

what are your thoughts on that?

Daniel Schmactenberger  42:30  
I will kind of use the frame of using the Masters tools to dismantle the house or you know, something to that effect.

A key characteristic of Moloch that is actually deeper than the traditional assessment you usually get to like the slides. Are codecs one doesn't quite get here

Unknown Speaker  43:05  
is

Daniel Schmactenberger  43:09  
that power seeking psychologies that don't have psychology that restrains the use and abuse of power get more power. And so psychologies that are both oriented to do everything they can to get and utilize power and don't restrain themselves and their use of it. For reasons like ethics will end up getting more power, and ones who are either less oriented towards it or don't want to use it harmfully, create bases to have less of it. So the world ends up being run by sociopaths. And that's like a very deep underlying thing to address. It can be a relatively small percentage of the total population. But it's important to understand that

power itself follows a power law distribution.

Wouldn't in a tribe where everyone is roughly symmetrical in strength, the toughest guy isn't tougher than three average guys, right? But the richest guy today is richer than three average guys. He might be richer than 3 million average guys together. And if he has access to nukes, he might be more powerful than 3 billion average guys together. It's like what the fuck? That's so many orders of magnitude of asymmetry. So are, you know, technology and capital have created thousands, millions billions of times asymmetry in power. And that's not an evolutionary thing, which means that it actually broke evolution in the way that we think of it. Evolution depends upon symmetries of power. I won't get into x and talk about that other places. But when you have a power law distribution like this, of say wealth, there's there's like only a few people in groups that a trillion dollars. And then there's a slightly larger group that have 100 billion but still very, very small. And then you realize that there's a tiny number of people that have more ability to influence the whole than whole other populations combined. And the same is true with access to military power. So then you say, what does it take to get to the top of the power law distribution of power? Or what what does it take behaviourally? And then what does it take psychologically to decide to create the disposition for those behaviors and to be successful at it? If I have a bunch of money? I don't. It's very hard for me to know why someone claims to like me. Right or why they want to be my friend or why they want to be in a relationship, especially if people know that I have a lot of money. It's very hard for me to have a sense of trust and authentic relationship. This is a psychological harm almost every wealthy person I know has in common. There's a bunch of reasons why it really sucks to have more power. It also means that I'm going to be forced to engage in some of these rivalries, things, where it's like, doesn't matter, Democrat or Republican, all the presidents of the US in recent history have used the US military to kill civilians. That's a big fucking deal. Most people on here would not want to authorize a drone strike that was going to kill civilians. So engaging in the game of power becomes obligated if you get near the top of the power stack. So typically, cluster B type disorders that are both oriented towards wanting power and that are less restrained in their use of it will do better at getting it in groups that either are more considerate of the whole and Don't want to externalize and cause harm are going to get less power which means less influence over the system as a whole which means the whole system will have this gradient towards sociopathy. Now this all of the conversations around theodicy and the nature of evil and power and whatever, like come up here.

Why did I bring that up?

Because you asked about the Amazon okay.

If you start to understand why the Amazon is an issue, you'll realize that the people that are making the decisions to do the turn the rain forest into grazing land for cattle from McDonald's or to take the base metals of the precious metals or to run trafficking of arms and people and drugs through it or oil or whatever it is.

All share this motivational landscape.

The the corporations have a financial interest

The end it's important to understand even here that

the relationship of limited liability of a corporation oriented towards sociopathy because the corporation can make money pay people out that money. Those people are really because a corporation isn't an entity, it's a fictitious it's not a real agent or real entity. The people who get paid out the corporation is going to protect the corporation can bankrupt and those people can do a new thing. But the corporation can't go to jail, it can only get fine. So it doesn't have comparable downsides relative to its upsides and it's not subject to law because of Corporation breaks a law you can't put it in jail and you can do is find it. And if the fine costs less than the money made by violating the law, you just violate the law and pay the cost of the fine or if the fine starts getting too expensive. You pay lobbying to change the laws that quote that dumb criminals break laws and smart criminals make laws

is a kind of an important insight. So

the corporations have those incentives the people within the corporations and the nation states behind the corporations have the incentives they have. So, you know, we have European, Chinese and North American companies mostly going to the Amazon. They have national national security interests behind them the Chinese multinational companies also have CCP interests to have hundred year food security and hundred year resource security and corner certain markets and have positions in the Americas relative to the US. So they have very serious high level interests that are not to the protection of the Amazon right now the government has to still okay certain things but Government is also a non agent run by people. And so the particular person that got to be the head of the interior or the president isn't going to be in that position for all that long. But he's going to keep being a person and having a family and having a legacy for a long time. So, if he tries to do the thing that protects the Amazon four years later, when he's out, someone else will fuck the Amazon. So it seems inexorable. But if he goes ahead and lets it happen, he gets a bank account in Switzerland or Liechtenstein filled up with a bunch of money for him and his family. So you can see how there's a confluence of perverse incentive and asymmetry between the upside and downside kind of everywhere. But it's important to understand that the psychologies that are in play in making those decisions are not the ones that they express to be right. And then news everyone's expressing certain considerations, but those those are not the actual ones that play and but now What types of tools do they use to be effective? Well, you have financial institutions that have trillions of dollars, or at least 10s, or hundreds of billions of dollars in assets under management that can financially manipulate a sovereign government by being able to pay off enough of the corrupt politicians being able to incentivize the government as a whole to basically co OPT its sovereign law. Greenpeace doesn't do that. Right, like the nonprofit's that are trying to protect the Amazon for the most part, they aren't even trying to protect the Amazon, the young activists in them are the top of the NGOs, the NGOs end up getting a lot of power, some of the NGOs and this is actually an important thing to understand that I learned very much the hard way coming up in the space is if there's a problem, and you incentivize what you make a company or an organization or a nonprofit or a government agency to solve that problem, and now The there are people who have salaries forever, and they didn't have salaries before and they have access to power and prestige. If you really solve that problem, that whole thing would go out of business and all those people lose all that stuff that was beneficial to them. So they have an ongoing incentive to maintain the problem and maintain the legitimacy of them as a response to managing it. So the incentive skew towards managing problems forever rather than really solving or obsoleting them. So you have to really pay attention to the incentive architectures underneath all of those things. Usually, I can look at someone has a plan for how to fix the Amazon or the grid or nuclear disarmament, I just have to look at the incentive landscape of the institutions and people that are involved and will usually have a pretty quick sense of where it fails.

So as a transition from game a to game B,

where we are in the presence of ubiquitous rivalry that is both empowered with very high level national and private intelligence and The top level financial capabilities and private militias and all that shit. We don't get to game B, if we lose comprehensively in the game a thing right now. So this is this question we've asked before of if the peaceful cultures always get killed by the warring cultures. And if they don't get killed at the warring cultures because they get better at war, which makes them no longer peaceful cultures. That's another way to describe Moloch. How do you have peaceful cultures that don't get killed by the warring cultures or get converted into them? is another key way to kind of think about this. And another way to think about it is what is legitimate power versus a legitimate power. And one way of defining that one way I define it is so let's say we have a power law distribution of power. If I start to gain more power in that So I have 10 X the money of average people or 100 X or whatever it is, or visibility or something I'm benefiting from that. I can pay gardeners and maids and people to come do shit for me at less than I make per hour like I'm really benefiting from that power asymmetry. And if those people who charge that rate charge the same thing I charge I wouldn't be able to do it. So I maximally incentive to maintain that power asymmetry and grow it. So it goes from maids and gardeners to yacht repairs and whatever else right. And so typically, if anyone has an asymmetry of power, they have both an incentive and the capability to grow their asymmetry of power, they have the capability because they have more power, right. And they have the incentive. So I would say illage illegitimate power is doing that is utilizing asymmetric power to maintain and grow the asymmetry of power, which then has other groups that are Most everyone else isn't capable. So you have the separation of the haves and the have nots. And the haves are the other ones who have power within two arms races with each other, and competitions for controlling the minds of everyone else. So they vote and purchase in the right direction. What I would call legitimate power or power in a game, the direction is, if I have an asymmetry of power, I want to use it to uplift everyone else to have more power and to utilize it better to increase the legitimate power access of everyone else. And which is basically what teacherly authority is, right? Teacher is saying, Okay, I have knowledge that they don't have, but I'm not trying to maintain the knowledge over my student forever. I actually want my students to surpass me. So how do I use this increased capacity and they did that intentionally developmental way. Now, what I want is people who have that orientation actually get good at power, actually develop a symmetric power so it's not Only that the CIA and the CCP and the Kremlin and dark pool organizations that have it and Blackwater, but it's groups that are authentically oriented and legitimate use of power who are developing it and then utilizing it for those purposes. And that power both means that they can adequately defend themselves against the attacks, while helping to move things in a different direction. So if I look at what are the capacities and what are the tools that say multinationals will use to influence sovereign governments to take their mineral rights and whatever they'll come give them a big ass loan

that they know they can never pay back

that's collateralized with the asset rights of the infrastructure of the country, right the World Bank has done that forever China learn from watching the World Bank, they're doing it better than we are but it's the same shit. So, um, and they another example of a tool they'll use so that's called predatory lending. Another example We'll be bundling. And we see our politicians do this all the time. Here's Proposition A, makes clean water for everybody. And without it, we're Flint, Michigan and whatever and everybody's gonna fucking die from Mexico made Okay, everybody wants proposition eight, but in the fine print, it also includes taking away some civil liberties that has nothing to do with clean water and like what the fuck when the surveillance tech is implanted everywhere? How does that have anything to do with it? Well, because the the person who wanted that figured out how to bundle it where you have to go for it. So bundling is a game a tool that is mostly used for evil.

Unknown Speaker  57:35  
But it could be used for good.

Daniel Schmactenberger  57:37  
Right, just like the right types of lending and indebtedness could be. So let's say let me give the example of Ecuador in the Amazon now I was building rules.

Phil Chin  57:49  
Yes, great. I was just gonna jump in and ask how you connected back and specifically with Ecuador example.

Daniel Schmactenberger  57:55  
So the since I've got nine different countries have got to deal with and the AMA As a whole doesn't have sovereign law, there isn't an idea that has any meaningful power to be able to bind predatory capitalism. So I have to work at the level of the individual countries. But we already said that if a particular country says we're not going to let rainforest extraction happen, they do so much economically less well than the other countries that they get so much pushback. So how do we create a situation where a single country can actually do economically better and better in terms of their economics, their publicity, their national security by doing something that's also environmentally more friendly? So we create a race to the top rather than the race to the bottom? Can we engineer such a scenario? The answer ends up being Yes. And this is one of the things I'm particularly interested in. So let's say we take Ecuador as an example because it's the headwater of the Amazon. Right. Brazil is the largest total body of Amazon, Peru has some of the most biodiversity, but the headwater of the Amazon is the most sensitive area and it happens to be highly

at risk right now.

So Ecuador owes $14 billion to the World Bank and $20 billion to China that it doesn't have any economic capability to be able to pay off. So those are loans that are going to default at some point. They are collateralized with the asset rights at the headwaters of Amazon. What do we do with that headwaters? The Amazon goes the entire Amazon goes. Well, what most NGOs do is they just put picket signs by the bulldozers and tried to like hold the frontline and maybe empower the indigenous people with some resistance of the frontline, which doesn't fucking work at all right? Because this way you have an indigenous person, an indigenous leader getting killed pretty much every day in the Amazon. And they don't mind hiring private militias behind plausible deniability that they didn't do it like that is par for the course all the time. Now, slightly craftier activists will say okay, what we're gonna do is rile the people up to really care. Well, the people are poor, they want economic opportunities. It seems like there's an endless amount of Amazon and it's all benefiting a few indigenous people and not them. And, and they, the nonprofit's don't control the media as effectively as the for profits do, which is what's telling everyone else Hey, they're trying to keep us from our own national assets and keep you poor. Okay, so how do you actually win at the narrative game? And then maybe even craftier ones will say, okay, really we have to do with economics. So we're going to bring an economics alternative to extractive rainforest stuff, we're going to say, hey, look, we're going to bring a Silicon Valley tech sector to Quito so that you can start making a lot of money with tech so you don't have to do the rain forest stuff. And they say awesome, do that. We don't think it'll work if it does work. Awesome. And And we're still doing the Amazon sales because that's money today. And we know how to do that. So you don't just have to bring an alternative you have to bind the predatory capitalism not just bringing alternative better capitalism, you have to bind to the other one because if you don't find the other one, both running side by side, the other one still kills everything. Alright, well, how do you do that? So an example in Ecuador could look like this, and I'm giving it at a very high topological level, but you can just see the types of thinking. There, just like climate change has a runaway positive feedback loop, where at a certain point in climate change, the heating makes it easier to heat faster. Reinforce destruction as a runaway feedback loop because you have this thing called the hydrological pump where water is evaporating through the trees which makes moisture which creates it being a rain forest, which keeps pumping water because you have a lot of rain. Now what happens with that hydrological pump is some of the water falls back over the Amazon and some of it goes into the atmosphere and goes through some convection current and that's actually where 30 to 50% yearly of North America's rainfall comes from is transpiration from the Amazon. And you start to lose enough forest cover where you get less rain. And then you get less transpiration which gets drier, which makes it easier for the to lose more forest cover and fires and like that and you get a kind of runaway dynamic. So that's called breaking the hydrological pump. So, how far are we with rain forest cover destruction in the Amazon before we get that positive feedback loop? We don't know different scientists hydrologist think somewhere between next year and 15 years from now, but both of those are really fucking soon. And next year is really soon.

But now you think about okay.

If you break the hydrological pump, and North America loses 30 to 50% of its rainfall. What's the effect on the US of that? Well, it pretty much collapses the US as we understand it. today. We lose agricultural or agricultural production, we lose our aquifers. It's we that creates massive have both economic hits and national security threats.

So

should the State Department see the destruction of the Amazon as a national security threat to the US? Yes, they should. Do they currently know nobody's been thinking about that putting those together? Does the State Department have big boy capabilities to intervene just like the multinationals do with a different set of incentives where you're actually helping where you're where you're identifying the agents that have the ability to do something and helping change the incentive that they are oriented towards? Yeah, that's a possible strategy. So I've talked to some people about that State Department, they're like, yes, if we can see that that's a real thing, then we would ensure that that didn't happen. Well, that buys some time. It's not a long term solution, because you can't be keeping economic development from happening for a long time. So you also didn't have to propose economic development opportunities for those countries, but that also bind the predatory capitalism parts. So rather than say, we're going to help you, Ecuador, build your own mining company, rather than the Chinese multinational come in and do the mining for you where they have no incentive to do environmental protection, because they're going to leave and don't give a shit about the toxic tailings left, and they don't even employ local people, they bring their own people over and you make a penny on the dollar, because you're just basically selling the asset rights. We're going to help you create your own national mine, where you employ people at a fair wage living there and it's environmentally safe, and you have the right incentive to do it. And you don't have to do anywhere near as much of it to make even more money because you have higher margins and consultants on the market. You just don't have the capability to do that upfront. So we're gonna bring the capital in the in the contracting capabilities to help you do that. We can't just do that because that's still doesn't mind. The other thing that we say is

can we get this if the State Department got involved

And said, fuck, we actually have to do this ongoing land. We can't do it militaristically we need to get the debt forgiven? Can the State Department put pressure on the World Bank to forgive the debt based on the relationship? Sure it could could the World Bank put pressure on the Chinese government to do the same thing and not down grid the quality of their debt? Yeah, they could. There's an arrangement you could make there. So now let's say we create an organization, we start to talk to the State Department about that they'll start to talk to the World Bank about that deal, see how to kind of set that thing up. And then we also look at how to do the mining properly that creates wealth for the people in the area. And so we now we come to the president of Ecuador and the other people and say, Look, we have a deal. We can get your debt forgiven. And we can increase the economic prosperity of your country more than it currently is while protecting the Amazon well increasing your national security well, making you time man magazine Man of the Year and a hero to your people and internationally and Then you become the leader of how to best do developing nations in the South American region. Now here's the deal, we've we've set up this whole bundle package, and we'll help you with it will actually help kick off the not just the mining but the schools and all these other things. And this because the mining will be very high profit, but say schools and roads and county clinics need money subsidized from somewhere. So we bundle it into a investable operating agreement, where it's net profitable and highly securitized, because it's basic infrastructure backed by their own government bonds. In a world where most bonds are negative interest yielding right now so we can get massive pension funds with trillions of dollars to be able to get a couple percent return and they like things so we say look, here's the deal. We will mezzanine finance this thing for you. We'll open it up to the capital markets and get the Canadian and Norwegian and other hedge funds to come in. We'll negotiate a settlement of your debt. We'll do all this kind of stuff, but it's an all or nothing package, like either get the whole fucking bundle or you don't get any of it. Now can we make a more attractive bundle than the fucked up when they're giving and that's using manipulative tactics, but that are actually in the service of the environment and the people rather than fucking the environment and the people to extract as much as we can and externalize, that would be called using game a tools well, towards a authentically game be oriented kind of purpose. Now Ecuador starts doing better and Brazil's like, Fuck, we want this deal. And you start to get a race to the top between the countries, right? I learned about how to think about those complex kind of operating agreements from a friend named Nelson Del Rio, who's one of the best thinkers on this topic. He helped develop the p3 model, the public private partnership, and then saw how that got weaponized. So he moved on to a project called prosperity of the commons and has has done really brilliant work in the space. Like there's a million details And how that actually works. And there's a million Yeah, but that couldn't work because such and such that are actually pretty well thought out from people that have had real experience working in that kind of cutthroat international development space. But this is just an example. Right? It's an example of how to increase actual strategic and tactical effectiveness

towards different goals.

Phil Chin  1:08:24  
I appreciate that. You giving us that overview, and got some of it, I will remind others that this is recorded, it will end up going on YouTube. So I know it takes me some time to go through and try and cure many, many times. But it sounds like a more comprehensive solution as needed in terms of thinking about how we look at the Amazon. We have about maybe 15 minutes left, I do want to pivot to a question that's probably close to our hearts and pass it to Peter.

Peter Limberg  1:09:00  
You asked me a question the moment but I just got a text. I won't say who it's from, but they're in the room. Oh my God, please have Daniel smartmeter. Come back on that on the sex thing he evaded with Weinstein. So maybe we'll have time to squeeze that in after my question, but just wanted to throw that out there. Um, so yeah, my question was about power literacy and legitimate power. at the store, we have experimented a lot of different psycho texts. We have wisdom, Jim, that's for me. I know there's different techniques and modalities like virgin mapping and stuff like that based off sample versus technique in order to kind of get power awareness and whatnot. Do you have any recommendations? What we can do in this sort of body tribe that's forming the stone? We feel kind of there's like a family. There's like a loving tribe for me here. And is there any recommendations that you can give us to get legitimate power and gain power literacy?

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:10:01  
I remember when I first read the 48 Laws of Power. And I actually, I read that and I, I had read some too, but I hadn't read Machiavelli and I hadn't read Lacan and Strauss and a number of the other like source materials yet.

And

it was it was interesting. I was very impressed with what he did. I thought it was the worst book ever written. And that obviously also means a valuable thing because he took so much of military theory and core da and political and like all of the evil stuff of gay and he both said, one it's an equitable and to its virtue.

That's always the path to the dark side actually. pretty much always is

our use of this kind is inexorable sore Amman talking to Gandalf saying Sauron is going to win. There's no choice might as well beat us, right? Might as well join us rather than lose, right?

It's like that that story is always the case. So

I'll just share this because it's kind of interesting. I had a conversation several years ago with one of the most powerful evil power brokers in the world. Long one on one where I was actually surprised to how much he kind of both was inviting me into his world and opening up about it.

Unknown Speaker  1:11:41  
And

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:11:44  
the way he framed it goes like this. I'll just do it briefly because it's important. It's like, Look, humans are animals. Animals are either predators or prey. Predators Don't feel bad when they kill prey. If you feel bad when the prey humans die, It's because you're a prey human and you won't run the world, the apex predator will run the world, they will be the thing that determines the shape of an overall ecosystem. And whether you like what apex predators do or not, doesn't determine doesn't matter at all to the fact that apex predators will be the ones who run the world. So the only question is whether you have what it takes to make it into that group or not. And so that's the inexorable argument, right. power in the form of predatory power is inexorable. Can't do anything about it, it's always gonna win. Well, if that's the case, and I can't effectively fight against it that just binds all kinds of moral possibilities is just stupid and naive. So then the next part was power as virtue, which he said, and it's actually good that though apex predators are the ones who run the world, because they're the ones who are steely eyed and real and grounded enough to understand how shit works. And the world is actually kind of brutal and people who just don't get how it fucking works. Can Guide stuff, they'll make it worse. Sometimes you got to put a head on a spike in the yard to keep everybody else from being assholes. And so it goes from power as

inexorable to power as virtue.

And then some people stop there and then the last step is

feeling good about exercising your own power over because it says you are part of that class which becomes power as fetish, which is the movement from sociopathy to sadism. When you actually fantasize, fetishize the exercising of it. Now, of course, everything he was saying was utter gibberish. And it's important to know that and I didn't bring it up with him because I knew that wasn't relevant in that moment, I was basically getting more information. Like blue whale is neither predator and prey in a traditional sense. Neither is an elephant. The apex predator is lower on the food chain than a virus or a parasite or mosquito and Anyways, you're pretending that there's this thing that isn't really there. And you are not acknowledging that the arms race that has always won self terminates pretty soon because when you exponentiated externalization and war it actually destroys everything and so basically it's a gibberish but it's compelling enough gibberish that if you kind of want to do it anyways, it's plausible deniability. So, what Robert Greene did in the 48 Laws of Power was did the same move, right? Which is, these types of power dynamics are unanswerable. If you don't know who the sucker in the room is, it's you. Um, if you don't think these, these games are at play, either you're stupid, or you actually do know they're at play and you're signaling naivete as a power trick itself, or ignorant signaling or virtue signaling as a method of power. And so that was the power as an example. And then the power as virtue is, since this is the only way to be effective at getting anything done. If you have any ethic or moral or scruple at all, you better become excellent at this game of power, so you have a chance to affect the things you care about. And so it it basically tried to take whatever ethical immune system people had that would resist it legitimate evil applications of power, and say that's not possible, and then actually hook it into those evil applications of power are the only ethical thing which is basically trying to turn an immune system into an autoimmune disease, which some viruses and bacteria do exactly that thing, right. That's what's happening.

So one thing that I think is interesting is

give people that book as an inoculation. What an oftentimes they don't get inoculated they get infected and they become worse people. very commonly, as people really start to see how compelling it is, as it tells story after story of the person you trust, who, who was the most trusted fucked him over and gives example of how the person tried to say no, really, I am trustworthy because and they were all examples of fucked over it puts this little subconscious frame in the back of your head that everybody is a fucker out to get you and all trust is a vulnerability that's going to mess you up. So either you become a worse person after you become exposed to that. Or you embrace that those are real things, but they aren't the only real thing. And you decide from a deeper place that that isn't the thing you're going to do. And you become inoculated but now you don't you don't you're not naive to it so you don't lose to it so you don't set up trying to help the rain forest and lose to it because you know that fucking shit is happening. But you say I actually think that there is a way to to beat it without becoming So that's a very interesting inoculation. So if people become literate to the game of power, well as a community while simultaneously becoming clear on legitimate and illegitimate uses, and simultaneously clear on real versus signaling and the community has practices of helping each other with it, that's what the fucking code of knighthood was. Right, or any of those types of things was how do we develop legitimate power in the service of the collective good and hold each other to that? And that's totally missing right now, and totally needed.

One thing about that, I just want to say it's, it's important. The reason that the biblical teaching, don't let your right hand see what the left hand is giving. Right do your arms in the closet was acknowledging how problematic virtue signaling is and trying to say, if you have a, if there is something that moves in you deeper than other people recognizing it deeper than the wounded insecure child or the mate signaling impulse, if there is an authentic thing that you say, this is actually worth more than me getting credit for my life for a reason that is transcendent or spiritual, then that doesn't mean that there isn't still also wounded childhood mate signaling desire and you You just have to be aware of which is which. And one of the problems of any kind of set of ideals or developmental idea is as soon as we talk about the ideal, or talk about what development in the direction of more moral, more ethical, more sovereign is, then someone else can hear that and try to do the behaviors that look like that thing without that actually being an embodied state. And there's going to be benefits to signaling that even earnestly even like the kid trying to ask Like the parent doing the thing? So how do we increase people's earnestness to work on the real embodiment of their virtues rather than the signaling of them? And the signaling only where that is actually necessary and effective for authentic purposes. Right, right.

Peter Limberg  1:19:19  
Yeah. I love that. What came up when you're talking in sort of this ecology of practices that is emerging out of the stoah, a power literacy knowing it from a declarative stance, and having it adjacent to call a practice where you just have a radical truthfulness as you refer to the truthfulness, and then you can speak on it openly amongst each other in an embodied way. So people are privately messaging me wanting to sex question like, ask them the sex question as assessed question, and we have and we have, like six minutes left with a lot of time, is that something you want to feel or do you want to? Can we seduce you back somehow, in for this session?

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:19:58  
I mean, Trank Trying to address sex in six minutes is funny. And I don't know what the second question is, like, like trying to address power right now in a couple minutes to dialogue about the relationship between sexuality and power, and the memes and cultural norms around sexuality, the different kinds of options that are there and what the consequences associated with them is, is a super important and interesting topic. And sure, I'd be happy

Phil Chin  1:20:28  
to do that sometime.

Peter Limberg  1:20:32  
Cool. Phil, do you have any final things you would like to run by Daniel?

Phil Chin  1:20:37  
Yeah, no, I think there's definitely a lot more questions on I was trying to read through and see if we can fit another question. I think I would just like to leave. Daniel, do you have anything else that you want to say or leave the audience with

We'll also say that this next question was specifically around, I guess, anti rival. This is something of very much interest, you can give us a cliffhanger on that and have his finger next month. Right?

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:21:18  
There's a very short book

that I really love. That was one of the more influential books on me growing up by a Jesuit priest who is also a student of Eastern traditions named Anthony de Mello. The book is called the way to love. And it's a tiny little pocket book of these kind of reflections or meditations. There's a lot of ideas around sex that I would talk about that if people are not familiar with the ideas he brings up in there, they won't actually have the basis for some of the value system. So of course We can talk about it from an evolutionary bio perspective. And we have to do that and an economic perspective and a child rearing perspective and all those things.

But in so far as the question around,

you know, you have the, the Buddhist desire is the source of all suffering, in the western desire is the source of all creativity and goodness, and we're here to be creators made in the image and likeness of the Creator. Those are really different models about the nature of desire. And that's actually something that kind of have to wrestle with and the whole topic of are there types of desire that are more destructive and types that are more healthfully? constructive? And do they come from different places is their desire from more wholeness or less wholeness that leads in the direction of kind of increased wholeness individually and for the relationships versus addiction, whatever. So there's stuff around that, that becomes the basis to think about sexual desire, and sexual rivalry and all those types of things. So yeah, I recommend that And I will be particularly inclined to come back and talk about it. If I hear that a bunch of people have read it

Peter Limberg  1:23:11  
through I can jump in here. So

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:23:13  
I'm and

Peter Limberg  1:23:16  
yeah, that's funny, Daniel. It's like that we had a session earlier today maybe grade two something on only fans and raw sexuality but he does come in on Friday during the last field. If you read my journals, I'm horny all the time. So we're becoming like existential perverts here at the stoah. So I think we're all going to read that book and then get you back to

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:23:33  
talk about it.

Peter Limberg  1:23:35  
So Phil, thanks for the I'm seeing and Daniel, thanks so much for coming today.

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:23:39  
If people haven't read it, Wilhelm Reich's work was very interesting on the topic. I'm not saying I agree with it, but it's it's one of the things that should be thought about. He was basically saying what was wrong with Marxism and one of the things he assessed was that Marxism didn't deal with sexual ownership and the the impulse for non communitarian things that arises here. And how to deal with that. And that became actually one of the deep intellectual bases of the free love movement, which I think is not the right answer, but just to kind of understand one of the directions. And specifically, it had to do with him looking at the relationship between sexual repression and violence across cultures, which is very interesting sociologically. And almost like the follow up to that work, half a century later was sex at dawn, which was influenced by that. So it's valuable to read sex at dawn. It's also valuable to read the critiques of sex at dawn, some of which are really deep and important, some of which are specious. And those are all kind of some bases to start to have the conversation a little more informally.

Peter Limberg  1:24:44  
Right. I think there's a book sex ed dust, maybe it was a critique. Yeah.

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:24:49  
Cool. It's like largely specious. But there's a few good things in there.

Peter Limberg  1:24:52  
Yeah, that's what I heard and century of the self has a pretty good mapping of that documentary series that I'm Curtis. Very cool. So Daniel, Thank you, my friend for coming to the store today. Um, maybe you can stick around for two minutes. You can hear the upcoming events and maybe we can get you at some of them. So for upcoming events of the store, Raven, do you want to talk about we have tomorrow with Sam. Oh, and then your event on Friday?

Unknown Speaker  1:25:15  
Yeah, thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:25:17  
So yeah, we have live players with Sam oberliga at 8pm. Eastern time tomorrow, Sam was coming back for recurring session to talk about that would choose studying with the long, long now. And this mark analysis, which is institutional design, succession problems, the great founder theory. He's really done and his speaking and very engaging, I would encourage every one to come. Then we have Earth regeneration with Dr. Brewer on Friday as well. Joe is doing a lot of important work with ecosystem restoration. So he'll be coming to talk to us about that. And then I'm doing an event right, which is Socratic speed dating. We're doing a game called ASCO, which is A social boundary breaking game. So we'd love to have you there. That's an hour long on Friday at 7pm. Eastern time. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:26:09  
Great. Thanks, Raven, and Tyson, do you want to go off and talk about your event on Saturday? Yes, thank you, Peter. Thank you, Daniel. My man actually emerged right at a time that I heard this quote from Daniel, which is recognizing how big of an infinity the unknowable is, everyone has to make very deep friends with uncertainty to not be mentally ill. And my event that I'm sharing is called flowing with unknowingness. And we use freestyle rap and spoken word as a practice to build communities and really participate dive unknown through creative self expression. And it has been a really wonderful way to me to get to know people here in a very fun playful and musical way. And so I would invite anybody here that that is a little bit nerve wracking and

