Raven Connely  0:03  
The Stoa is a digital campfire where we coherent dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of what's happening now. 

James Dean  0:37  
Hi. Wait a minute. I've seen you before.

Unknown Speaker  0:50  
Well stop the world as being friendly. Well, now that's true.

Unknown Speaker  0:56  
But life is crushing it on me. 

James Dean  0:58  
Life can be beautiful. I know where it was.

Unknown Speaker  1:05  
Where was I?

Peter Limberg  1:11  
All right. I have no idea why I played that. But anytime we hear James Dean say life can be beautiful is a good day to me. So welcome to the store, I'm Peter Limberg the steward of the stoah. And for those of you who don't know, the Stoa is a place for us to cohere and dialogue about what matters most at the knive's edge of this very moment. And today, we have Daniel Schmactenberger returning sensemaking Mench. And he's going to discuss his Dharma inquiry questions. So in a moment, I'll kind of unpack how the session is going to go today. But yeah, actually, I'll just unpack it right now. So Dana is going to talk about his Dharma inquiry questions. And then which I'll share in the chat box in a moment. If you have any questions, type it in the chat box. unmute yourself when I asked you and you can ask your question to Daniel, if you'd like me to read this, on your behalf, just indicate that because this will eventually go on YouTube, and after, so this is a 75 minute session. And afterwards, we're going to take a brief break, go on a bio break. And then we have a session that follows is called flowing with unknowingness, which is usually on a separate link. But today, we're going to just keep stay on this link like we did last time if you were here. So I'm going to allow my boy our boy Tyson to unmute himself and kind of explain what that is. So if you can kind of like prep your mind if you want to attend that or not. So it ties in if you're in the room, and you're saying, 

Tyson  2:44  
Yeah, thank you, Peter. Yes and flowing with unknowingness. We will deepen our relationship uncertainty. We will train our trust muscles through freestyle rap and spoken word. This is open and approachable that anybody even if you've never done those things before, I would say, when you're speaking, you're rapping whether you know it or not. So this is playing some beats bringing in some more rhythm and music into our sensemaking and our dialogue. So if you like, dialogue you like sense making, and you're also like to get musical and be playful, then you might enjoy it. Great, thank you Tyson. It really puts you at the edge of your comfort zone. And you can build that relationship with unknowingness in a very innovative and fun way. So before I hand over to Daniel to share his thoughts, we are going to try something different. We're going to have a Google Doc open and maybe gray one of our MCs who who does the raw sexuality series. She's our sort of our meta modern sex columnist here at the stoah she's going to be the note taker keeper. I don't know how that's gonna go. But maybe if you can unmute yourself and let us know what that's about.

Maybe Gray  3:58  
Yeah, I've just posted The link in the chat to everybody should just be an open document is blank right now. But feel free to contribute. I'll start posting questions and you can nest attempted answers of the questions if you want. And we'll just let it kind of unfold. No, no plan to see what comes up, do our own little like parallel Dharma inquiry along with the Dharma inquiry that happens here.

Peter Limberg  4:25  
Maybe you can post the questions in the actual Google Doc, maybe some people will come on it and stuff like that.

Maybe Gray  4:30  
Yeah, I can do can do.

Peter Limberg  4:31  
Cool. Thank you. So that being said, Daniel, my friend, I'll take you in any opening thoughts or statements for us?

Daniel Schmactenberger  4:42  
of discussing the Dharma inquiry, here was your idea. So I'd love to hear why you thought that was a good thing for the stone and then we'll dive in.

Peter Limberg  4:50  
Let's do it on the spot. I think I saw you post that originally on Facebook and I was blown away by the The questions and then the order of how you arrange them, which people can see on the Google Doc in a moment. And just something intuitively struck me about that, that this is right. These questions are kind of like gesturing towards something that is altogether good. And like recently, a bunch of people are still doing the questions going through them themselves. And so it dawned on me, I don't know how he presented it to you. But I'm like, everyone's digging, digging these questions. Maybe we do a talk on them to kind of get a sense of how you structured them. And then the hope was eventually like, we can go off on our own and develop like, like stoah sessions to help each other work through the questions.

Daniel Schmactenberger  5:45  
Yeah, great. I think I don't know if everyone has seen the document. The doorman Korea document, is it in the chat? The link to it?

Peter Limberg  5:54  
Yes, it's in the Google Doc. And then there's the link in the chat as well.

Daniel Schmactenberger  6:00  
It's pretty self explanatory, easy to just go through it on your own and ask those questions and kind of reflect on them and journal on them. But I have never like given a talk about these topics before, but I'm quite happy to discuss it and then we'll get into q&a on it because it's such an important topic. So yeah, I posted as a note on Facebook, typically, if I'm writing on something, it's generally catastrophic risk, or macroeconomics or governance or some kind of social topic, but everyone's wildly right on personal topics. And that's what Facebook notes is. And if you go there, the thing that gets me to write a Facebook note is when I have a conversation with someone like the same conversation about 10 times in a week, then I decided as a time saving device for myself to write that thing up so that I can just reference people to it in the future. So that's what this was, is that when I'm talking with people, it's one of the most important talk topics that comes up is people who have a kind of heartfelt desire to have their life be more meaningfully contributing in some way and wanting to figure out what the unique path for them is, what is their path of right livelihood, right action. And there are some answers that are general that are kind of true for all people. But then it if someone, someone can be living virtue and Dharma and write universal principles, as their vocation as a painter, or as a scientist, or as an activist in different domains they can have kids or not have kids is like very different life paths that are all expressions. So how does someone get a sense of what is Dharma in general? And then what is it uniquely for them? And as far as I'm aware, there is no algorithm for this. But there are certainly considerations that help and so this is why it's a bunch of questions rather than a bunch of rules. And these are the these are examples of the questions that I would find when I was trying to understand Someone enough to get a sense of what is the arc of their life Then what is it that lights them up the most? What do they feel called to? What is the unique life experience that they've had? Make them uniquely capacitated? To add to the world? These are the types of questions I would ask. it's by no means exhaustive, sometimes I would ask a totally different one. So you can also take these as the starting point for explorations of you know, what other good questions would be. I'll start by framing the way that I, I called it Dharma engrade. Dharma is a Sanskrit word and all a frame kind of how I think of that word in concept. The word is actually quite an ambiguous word and a translation to English both because even in the eastern world, it means something quite different in Hinduism, and Buddhism and Jainism like it has a slightly different connotation and different interpretations and there is no one for one translation to English. So the way that I'm going to describe It is my own understanding and relationship to it. And not saying that this is a authoritative Sanskrit interpretation, the way that I think about Dharma is like, what is right? choice, which is the path of right choice unique to that being that has them aligned with the order of the universe, or the order of the nature of reality. It's something like that. There are some concepts and other languages like use of via that are kind of similar. The way that Dharma expresses itself I have found to be the best word for it. But it in English people will think about it as like virtue or like vocation or mission or purpose, or passive right action, but it's kind of inclusive of all of those and So I'll kind of unpack why. When people think of mission and purpose, they usually think of a definable thing that they're going to do. And a definable thing that someone is going to do is a tiny subset of all of the micro choices that are who someone is being right. If I say, I actually am crystal clear that I have this mission, I came from poverty. So I want to help solve poverty, I'm going to go back to the ghetto where I came from and help solve that, or I'm going to reform education or whatever it is, I can do that I can be addressing poverty and be an utter asshole to my kids or an asshole to the people that I meet or out of integrity with my own body and relationships, and I'm still doing that mission. Right? So

when we're talking about what is the path of right life for me, it is both being and doing and to go a little deeper it's being and doing and becoming and I would say those three concepts are a kind of bare minimum to think about it well. And the doing, like what is what is it that I think is mine to do will change throughout my life. Some people will have one thing they work on pretty consistently, but some people will be like, Alright, I'm working on education for a while, and then it changes to intentional communities in agriculture. And there's a string through those that is that person developing in their own capacity and what they can contribute, and they might all be right action at a particular time. We talked about this last time on the Stoa. But the first verse of the Tao de Ching, I think it's so important that it was the first verse. So Lao Tzu is going to write a book of wisdom. And the very first thing that he writes is everything in this book is not actually it. Right. The first verse is that the Dow that is knowable, the Dow that is speakable is not the eternal dow the knowledge that is known. Not the eternal knowledge. So it's like, okay, don't get caught on taking the rest of this book as scripture, take it as a pointing out instruction to your own inquiry where you can touch something that is beyond something you could actually describe. And so similarly, I would say if you can describe your Dharma, that's not it. Because you can say, Okay, well, here's what I'm going to do. Well, it might be at a different point in life, say, a war breaks out, and you can't do that thing. And there's other shit that you need to do or whatever that is, actually, that might be your sense of mission in this moment, but it's not the totality of what right doing is for you. And if you say, Okay, well, I'm gonna make a list of all the virtues that I want to live. Well, there are going to be positive virtues that aren't in that list, some that you don't even know about yet. And so. So it's good to do that, right. It's good to have a sense of what do I feel called to do right now and one of the virtues by which I want to live But that's a living process and the process of how do I relate to that as best I can now and how do I continue to learn and relate to it better is dharma. So, roughly because I think this is a nice model, to contemplate Dharma said, being doing and becoming our minimum concepts, a way that I think about that is and we can see that different philosophic traditions emphasize each of these modes more than the other. We can see that there are Eastern traditions that emphasize the mode of being more not only Eastern traditions, but roughly were being in the moment and being with the fullness of the moment and not being in the illusion that the future could be better than the now that has you divorced yourself from the now is kind of the emphasis and particularly if they have a model of time, as well. circular, which the yoga system and the culpa system are circular time. So the idea of progress is seen as an illusion, then of course, getting off the Wheel of Time, which is being accessed by the moment and being in being seems like the thing that makes sense. We can see Western traditions starting with the Judaic, and then Greek and etc, traditions that have a linear model of time. So they have a dialectic of progress, things evolve over time. And so then doing things to add to the quality of the world and developing yourself becoming are valuable and just being in the moment means the world is kind of mostly passing you by and you're not really doing much of anything for anybody. There are partial truths in each of these and there are cyclic aspects to time and there are net developmental aspects of time. So you can think of that as a spiral type process. So I think of very simply the motive being as connecting to the beauty and meaningfulness of life in this moment and appreciating it. Or that's what the essence of the mode of being can be about. And people can do the mode of being do mode of being people can be in the mode of being more and less potently. So if I'm just exhausted at the end of the day, I can't quite fall asleep, but I can't do much anything else and I turn on the TV and kind of zone out. I'm in the mode of being, I'm not particularly trying to do anything or become anything. And I'm appreciating something I'm getting entertainment value. But it's, I would say most people would sense a less rich version and Thoreau, at Walden Pond taking in nature and an utter awe at the beauty of it right. Those are both the mode of being but different levels of energy and awareness and presence brought to them.

Ultimately, why is it worth doing anything? It's worth doing anything because I'm going to be adding to the beauty in meaningfulness of reality that is experienceable by other people, which means that it's going to ground in their mode of being, why do I want to help anyone, ultimately other people's experience matters. My own experience is the foundation of my ability to understand and relate to that. So doing and becoming both grounded and being, but being is not exclusive or complete. And so motive being taken the beauty of reality as it is fully motive doing add to the beauty of reality, whether that's protecting it or creating things made in the image and likeness of the Creator. We are here to be creators we create through thought word indeed. So inventory, your thought word indeed and see if they're creating a reality that's more beautiful and if not change them because they all have some impact. And the mode of becoming is develop yourself in both the modes of being and doing, increase your ability to be present and appreciate other people and appreciate life and take it in and be moved in touch. And overwhelmed and odd by it, and increase your capacities to serve the world. And to add beauty more, I would say, in contemplating Dharma, you're going to be contemplating all of these modes, and and their relationship.

And it is really like an ongoing sensing and an ongoing contemplation rather than something you figure out and then put on autopilot. And like I said, there is general sense of Dharma, right? Like there is a general sense of that these modes matter that there are things important in each of them that matter that developing oneself is useful. But then specifically, I can't study every language and I can't study every musical instrument. I can't visit every place in the world. I can't learn every science. I can't do every art show in which way should I develop myself with a very finite amount of time. When they are all beautiful, and they all matter, I can't help the animals in the factory farm and the people who don't have food and the, you know, racial justice issues and economic inequality equally well at the same time. So how do I choose? How do I sense into what is actually mine to do uniquely here? And so I would say there are general principles of right life and then there is that each person's unique life experience does capacitate them uniquely to certain things. And that continues to evolve and shift. So these questions I put in here were questions to help people sense into what moves them what their own values, what their own inspiration is. And what they are intrinsically kind of capacitated towards what they're where they're kind of gifted inclinations might be, and where they limit themselves where they don't think about the full scope of what might be possible because there are different things that seem limiting and if those limits were removed, what increased creativity might be there. And these are all questions that I find are quite helpful. And some of the questions for a particular person will reveal a lot more insight than some of the other questions and that's even insightful. Right? So the first section of questions is a bunch of asks about a bunch of limits. If you it's inquiring into if you had more money if you had more time if you had more intelligence if you had better connections if you're a better leader, and for some people you ask if you had more intelligence and it's like oh my god, I would be such and such and you can tell that they feel much more capacitated by the more intelligence so that's an area they feel limited for other people you say more intelligence or like, and you can tell that's not an area where they feel limited, but something else it was right so also getting to even see where does someone feel Have the most limited, and then why to explore that? Where do they feel the most increase in capacity and potential. And when you're increasing someone's sense of capacity and potential, they can start to think about what might be meaningful, what they might care about that sometimes they don't even let themselves because they don't feel like they're the agency tacked on it. So we can go through the questions, and I can kind of talk through them. But I guess since this is just a brief intro to the topic as a whole, are there any questions at this point?

Peter Limberg  20:36  
Yes, Sergey, if you would like to unmute yourself, view you asked about the structure and the order of it. Yes, thank

Sergey  20:47  
you. Hi, Daniel. Um, I wonder why you have picked this specific order of the questions. I mean, not the questions, per se but this books like you've started with capacitors Then move to values and then purposes, why not, for example, start with values and then go to this stuff or the other way around. And man,

Daniel Schmactenberger  21:12  
It doesn't matter that much. Um, you can experiment with which way matters more. So, in general, if I'm asking someone, personally, if I was in the dialog, I would ask the ones that I feel that I sense are where I'm going to get most insight first. And I won't even necessarily do them all in a block, I might be jumping around. So I had to put it down on paper some way. But there isn't really the order of operations and that doesn't matter that much. I find that of course, I put them in that order having to put them in some order. It's amazing how many people feel significantly limited and how much their creativity is damaged. By their limits and or how much they use limits as an excuse to not have deeper creativity, where if I remove the limits, first, their inquiry into their own virtues is better. Because what do they really care about? What would they most want to do what you know what virtues are most meaningful will sometimes still be limited to the extent of capacity that they feel like they have to act on it or imagine. So I asked how to increase their agency first, because it brings more depth of creativity and more depth of possibility into the other ones. But that's not true for everybody all the time. Other people feel a lot of agency and don't feel like they know what to do with it. And so then I'm asking clarifying questions. So if I had to put them in an order, that's why I put them in this order. And you can explore them in whatever order they feel most alive. And then of course, recursively, right. Sometimes when I go through my answer to the earlier ones evolves, because I have new insights.

Sergey  23:02  
Yep. Thank you. Cool.

Peter Limberg  23:06  
Scott, you had a question?

Scott  23:11  
Yeah. Hey, Daniel, as I told you before, your work is so nourishing and helpful and helps to orient and just appreciate the availability you give. So thank you for being here. So, I've come to this dilemma that often the things that we find to be our Dharma don't offer short term financial return. And most of the capital making opportunities actually seem to bring us in the opposite direction of the skills and the clear thinking ability we want to cultivate with our dharma. And so I've come in my life to a compartmentalization where you know, sometimes I can write and sometimes I need to make money to write, but there's this idea of side of me, or maybe just the most real side of me that there's got to be a better way than selling half my attention for money. Where there's another side to me that comes To know, this is just kind of the answer to a macro economic system, educational system and profession that's religious failing us in that way. So I'm wondering how do you think about the balance between living in your Dharma and working for enough extrinsic reward to have sufficient security agency?

Daniel Schmactenberger  24:20  
Pretend you're a hunter gatherer and you had to go pick some berries and hunt some shit and like, build a house now and again, as part of just living. And then sometimes you could work on making things better for your community and contemplating stuff. Like, we wouldn't consider that a corrupt macroeconomic system. It would just be that the reality of life is that tending to basic needs takes some time. And so I think, of course, we can make a better macroeconomic system than this. Of course, this macro economic system is a paperclip Maximizer where there's a lot of economic opportunities that are incenting predation and extraction right? than production. And that's really only useful to think about if you're working on changing the macro economy. If, if you are trying to fix the macro economic incentive structures for everyone you should think about that. If not, you should think about what will actually empower you in the allocation of your life more. And so only think about that, and so far as it helps you understand choices for you to make. I find that in general, if people are thinking about systemic injustice or systemic design problems, but they aren't working on fixing it, oftentimes, it just disempowers them, because then they focus on what's wrong with the world as it is, but they're not focused on making that thing better. So all it does is move some of their attention off of the things they could be making better. So it's valuable to note and then say, Well, I hope some people work on that. But this is kind of part of the stoic thing of be with the world as it is, and then see what you can do to move it in the right direction. And if you realize that every action you do has an effect in the world, so does every word but so does every thought because every thought is shaping you. Right? Your your connectome is changing, based on the thoughts that you're thinking and the emotions that you're having, and you have some control over those, then you want to say, is this thought empowering me to make a better world? And am I in my, is it somehow useful? So Buddha had his guidelines of Right Speech, which I think also translate to guidelines of right activity and right thought quite a lot. And it was before saying something contemplate, is it true, is it kind and then the last word is translated either as necessary or useful? Oh, I'll go the useful ones right now. And he said, if it's not all three, don't speak. If there's something that and true kind of talk about I know I'm on a tangent, but there's a reason because this is a deep question for everybody.

If there is something that I think is important to say, cuz it'll make someone feel better, it's kind, but it's not true. It's never actually kind. Because it's disconnecting someone from reality, which will always hurt their life more than facing the difficulty of the conflict sooner. So it is always better to actually help connect people to reality because they will navigate life better that way. So the idea that there's something that's not true, but it's the right thing to say, be very dubious of that outside of war, right? If the Nazis come to your house asking, do you have Jews there go ahead and lie, but outside of very narrow maximally game theoretic scenarios. That's not a thing to do with friends and allies. Similarly, the idea that there's something that's true that isn't common is always a lie. Because if I'm saying something that is like, why am I even opening my mouth to talk to them, if I don't care about them, somehow I could just write them off, not interact. So that kind doesn't mean what I'm saying is easy. It means that I care about their well being. And I'm saying this in relationship to them, and that I believe them having more truth in this way was beneficial. So most people kind of get those two, they don't necessarily always get the dialectic between them. Right. But useful or necessary is a key one, because it's recognizing that if there is not a clear, positive purpose to what I'm saying, Why the fuck am I saying? Like, what is running me? If I don't know what the clear intention and so often, like? You'll see a couple arguing and I just hit pause and say, What positive thing are you trying to bring about right now and they don't know. They're being run by reactivity. They're not trying to bring any positive thing about and it's amazing how much of that there is and even worse in our own thoughts. What positive thing is emerging from these thoughts because they're affected The actual neural structure of my being and what thoughts will arise easiest Next, the the brain subconscious complex learns to automate whatever we're doing so is to free up conscious bandwidth because we don't have that much conscious bandwidth. So if I judge myself a lot, it gets better at just automating that so that I don't have to keep thinking about it. I judge other people a lot if I find beautiful things. So it takes training ourselves to train what automatically arises more, which takes thinking about what is it that I am wanting to have arise and in my unconscious service to it. So the useful part? I'm focused on critiques of society all the time, right? Why the fuck am I focused on that cuz I'm actually trying to fix them I'm trying to come up with I'm trying to engage other people who might be interested in oriented and trying to fix them. And I'm working on systems for macroeconomics and governance. But otherwise, it wouldn't be very useful to put my attention on things that didn't increase my agency. To make things better, right, I have to ask in the mode of being Am I appreciating reality in the mode of doing am I adding to the beauty of it? Like what what is the what is the usefulness or the intentionality of this? So, I'm just saying that as a general frame for how to balance noticing what's wrong with the world with what is ours to do. Okay, now coming back to money. So I don't have to go hunting and picking berries. I make money in some kind of giant macroeconomic machine and then I go buy berries and hunted stuff and houses and whatever. Okay, so that's, you know, like, that's a macro economic version of how people meet their basic needs. Now, of course, in the 1950s, someone could buy a house on a just demand salary in 10 years. We nobody can do that today in the US for the most part. So we can critique things about macroeconomics, but the idea that it's Some of your life is going to be supporting your own base needs is quite reasonable. And it's part of Dharma, right? It's part of Dharma to take care of your body. It's part of Dharma to take care of your mind to take care of your environment to take care of your relationships, like it's right action to take care of those things that are yours to steward through whatever mechanisms you happen to have available. Now, on the question of right vocation, and money making, versus other things that I feel more aligned with, in the current world system, if someone was not, if someone does not already have independent wealth, then either they have to make their money doing the thing that feels like vacation. Or they should make their money in the least amount of time possible to buy another chunk of freedom to work on that both of those are totally valid for most of My life I chose the second.

And but I didn't begrudge the first like, I was doing construction work, putting myself through college. And when I was doing construction work, I related to it as Dharma like someone was going to live in those houses. And I, I had this idea that everything that is worth doing is worth doing well and excellence as a genre award. And I tried to build the most structurally integris beautiful things that I could build and love doing. Right. So it wasn't that building the house was outside of dharma. It was there was an application of and I was getting to take care of myself and my girlfriend who lived with me and like support us. I'm like, great. So that was darnel. Now it wasn't thinking about and working toward some of the bigger picture things but it was absolutely supporting my capacity to do that. And then as time went on, I'm like, Alright, there's bigger picture stuff I feel absolutely called to do and I need more time to do it. So how do I buy more of my time? Right I was born into a system where I basically aren't met. And so it takes a lot of my time to get them met. So I started thinking about how can I make more dollars per hour. And that looked like different kinds of activities. How do I make more dollars per hour doing things that I don't feel bad about doesn't have to be the highest expression of Dharma because it is meeting base needs in and of itself. So I kept my overhead very low. I figured out how to do things that I actually was learning at and enjoyed. And that I felt were doing something and then I bought just a huge amount of free time to work on, on stuff. So for the most part, the thing that felt like my vocation, I never got paid for, which also meant that I never had two masters issues. I was never trying to shoehorn Dharma into something that I could put a sales pitch on. And the two masters issues so often in conscious entrepreneurship, whatever. I try to pretend that the project is more meaningful than it really is because I need to make money and I try I try to like shoehorn all of my meaning into that thing. And it's mostly just greenwashed bullshit. It's like, yeah, this is a slightly better version of all the other shit that is out there. And if my company went bankrupt, the world wouldn't be any worse. But I can't sell that. So I have to put some spin on it. So if someone happens to get paid for writing, or be an academic, or be a therapist, or create a nonprofit that you have a salary from or whatever were the thing that you feel is yours to do, vocationally is also how you pay the bills. Awesome. Just be careful that when you do that, two masters issues become easier. It becomes easier to have to compromise the integrity of the Dharma for how you keep making the money. And whereas if they're separate, you don't have that at all. So basically, whichever one it is the fact that you have, like so few people throughout the history of the world have been able to contemplate the issues of the world and contemplate that they could even possibly do something about it. So I take it as like a ridiculous fortune to be in the position to have any hours to do that. And then I just continue to work on the best ways I can do it. Does that address the question? To some degree?

Scott  35:19  
Yeah, that was more than I ever could have hoped for. Thank you. That was awesome.

Daniel Schmactenberger  35:23  
Cool. Thanks.

Peter Limberg  35:27  
So we have a like a bombardment of questions. Do you want to just run with them, Daniel, or did you have something else that?

Daniel Schmactenberger  35:33  
No, I mean, we can go through the questions that are in the thing and explain them, but I think taking people's questions probably more useful.

Peter Limberg  35:39  
Cool. cleal. Martin, you had a question.

Martin  35:45  
Daniel, thanks for that. I apologize for the the my question kind of assumes something that I apologize for that. So basically, my question is it seems like having perceptive friends point things out to you about yourself is a is a extremely potent catalyst of understanding your own capacities. I want to know if you agree with this, and if so, who's done that you if you if you care to share Chan anything related to that. Thank you. Yeah.

Daniel Schmactenberger  36:22  
I think that I'll speak to the assumption first and onto the personal part. The assumption is a right one. I think blind spot is by definition, something I can't see on my own. Right. That's what that concept means, which means someone else might be able to see something about me that is important that I would want to see but I can only see through their reflection. And my wife does this thing where almost every year on her birthday, she asks her closest friends to come in a circle and give her feedback on her blind spots. Because the thing that she most wants is to be able to be more of the person that she most wants to be. And if she's missing that anywhere, that's like the greatest gift. A lot of people wouldn't think that's what they want for their birthday. But if they thought more about it, they would. And so if I have any genuineness about my values, the worst thing I can imagine is that I'm damaging them and not even realizing it. Right, that I'm either hurting things that I care about, or sucking at things that I care about, and I'm not realizing it. So if someone can give me feedback, how to be more of who I actually want to be that I'm missing, fucking awesome, right? Like, that's, that's cool. So you can get that in a professional setting with therapists and coaches and like that. You can get it in religious settings with having rabbis and priests and mentors that you talk to and you can get it through the right kinds of friends. So this is why in Buddhism you have the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. The Sangha is critical. It's why the church was great. Write is that it is a community of people in shared practice. It's why the you know, Greek philosophers were in the Pythagorean school or the Socratic school, they were in a place where they could be bouncing their thinking and their reflections of embodiment off of each other. Something else I'll say to that is that most of us like to pretend that we have more self direction and agency and freewill than we do. And we are more controlled by what shows up on our Facebook feed than we know and by the notifications on our phone and by what just happens to be around us that we don't even notice. So one of the best things you can do with the limited amount of freewill you have is make sure that the things that are conditioning You are the things you want to have condition you. So don't just pretend the independent of the people you're around or your environment or that immediate input you're taking you can be self determined, that's just fucking silly. Make sure that the things that you're taking are the things that you would most So ask Who do I want to be around that would be most uplifting to who and supportive of who I'm trying to be? What content do I want to be taking in and treat that as seriously as you treat? What nutrients do I want to bring into my body because your body will be made of the nutrients in your mind will be made of the things that that it's bringing in as well. So, for myself, I was super fortunate in this way. Because part of the being homeschooled thing early was I got to find mentors. And so I had a number of mentors starting young that were like really deep discipline guild type mentorships. 

And in most of them actually, in kind of psycho spiritual development. And so yeah, just super fortunate many You're kind of mentorships where everything that I was doing suddenly wrong that normally would take me many decades to notice I was getting pointed out continuously and supported and growing with which was awesome. And then I lived in communities of spiritual practice, and also kind of like, deeply engaged in psychotherapeutic communities where we do group practice. So people would be giving everyone feedback, you know, pretty consistently, and we'd be actively looking at our own shadows and blind spots. And then as I moved into more kind of academic focuses, I, my goal was to find the people that I thought were most well educated and smartest in different topics, didn't new things that I didn't and spend as much time around them as I could, so I could learn more, because it was clear that I was going to learn more being around people that knew stuff I didn't and otherwise. And particularly, the thing that I most liked to do was find people who had expertise in topics. I did. And find at least a couple of them who disagreed. So it's not just them being able to point out where I'm wrong, it's being able to see at the edge of the field itself, where they think each other are wrong. And then I'm trying to pattern my own sensibility off of that dialectic including where I would calibrate just the unknown. I think people kind of sometimes don't hold that like introspection and introspection are equally important. And they do different things and you can't get from one what you can get from the other. So no amount of contemplation by myself will give me some of the kinds of feedback that other people can. And simultaneously, no amount of feedback from other people will give me my own original insights, which will move me in different ways. So you need to balance those. And then with factoring other people's feedback, they're never 100% wrong. But they're often significantly wrong. And so if somebody says, I think this and this about you, it might mean as much about their limited frames and their traumas as it means about me. But if I, if I don't learn anything from it, then I'm not really paying attention. Because at minimum, I can see how my communication is landing on people. And that person is a representative of a whole type of people. And I could say, could I have communicated in a better way in a clear way to that kind of filter? Is there some signal in it? So when I'm taking feedback, I don't want to automatically assume that they're right or that they're wrong, right? I want to try and see it from their perspective. And then I want to say, what can I learn from that? And ultimately, it's going to be my own felt sense of truth and discernment that I'm going to go with. Does that answer the question?

Martin  42:53  
Thank you. Yeah, that's great.

Daniel Schmactenberger  42:57  
Currently, I feel just ridiculously fortunate. A lot of the people who are the thinkers that I respect most in the world are people that I have figured out how to be friends and colleagues with. And so I'm getting their thoughts and input on things all the time. And yeah, I would encourage everyone to try to advance in who you get to spend time around.

Peter Limberg  43:28  
Tyler ultimate and you had a question?

Tyler  43:36  
Yeah, sorry, I was just doing the dishes. Hi, Daniel. I can just read it out from the chat. So, one thing that I've noticed is that many practitioners of the Buddhist Dharma in particular but also just varying moral codes. And during self improvement systems will often tend to get a bit rigid in their adoptions of things like right speech or right thought to a right action in a way that sort of cripples, naturalists and originality. This maybe applies less in Buddhism to things like v audrianna. But it does apply certainly to the majority of possibly the majority of Buddhism. So I was curious how can one practice things like right speech or right thought or right action with out causing activity to become artificial? And

Daniel Schmactenberger  44:44  
There's a meta question that is actually a fascinating question I want to address first which is how can someone take anyone else's insights and not get stuck on the inside but inquire into what gave them that insight generator function of itself.

Um, I think I think almost every spiritual teacher has sucked at this, despite really wanting to be good. I think they mostly like you can see Krishna Morty and Ramana Maharshi and whatever trying to be like, man, how do I fucking get people to get this? It's what even Lao Tzu started the book saying the rest of the shit in the book is not it like don't Don't, don't fixate on it too much take it as a pointing out instruction to what am I trying to say here? What am I getting that? What am I seeing that has me say shit like this? Do you have your own experience? But there is a kind of maturity, developmental maturity for someone to look to themselves more to take that as an inspiration but to actually say, Buddha wasn't a Buddhist. What gave him that insight? What was the depth of reflection from which that emerged? What is an eye Do I actually have a embodied sense of what this is about? Or am I being a practitioner of a rule base? And if I'm trying to basically be an AI and I'm just not even a very good one, that's not the right thing to do for being human. So, and like the book of Ecclesiastes, is that the part where it says there's a time to kill and a time to heal and to show and to repin for every purpose under heaven. What it's saying is all of these other rules are wrong sometimes. Right? That's not killed, there's a time to kill. All of these other rules are wrong sometimes. So what is right action, there's no rule base that's going to tell you that what the fuck tells you that then a kind of presence and earnestness that allows you to have a real relationship with reality in the moment, right, a real relationship with yourself reality in the moment that can have consents into including but beyond all the rules that you've heard what right action In that moment is so that what Ecclesiastes is trying to say is that the higher principle beyond all of those other principles, is your own discernment and presence and Sensibility as to what the right principle to apply is.

And so, you know, the it's been brought up in science as much as spirituality that the biggest failing of Isaac Newton was that he didn't make more Isaac Newton's and the biggest failing of Krishna Murthy was he didn't make more Krishna Mercury's they certainly seem like they tried, they wrote shit they talked they. And so how I was fortunate that I got to hear the way Fineman thought about math fairly young. And I got to hear the way that Bucky learned and different things like that. So early The first time I heard the Pythagorean Theorem, the question came up for me, not just Okay, so what problems can I solve with the Pythagorean Theorem but How many people had thought about right triangles before Pythagoras and not figure that out? And then what led to him figuring it out? What was the unique kind of epistemic insight? What approach did he take that hadn't figured that out that nobody else before had, and then did that unique approach, give him other things did other things come from that? And that was, so that made me a very slow learner because I wouldn't just memorize the thing and move forward and start applying it. I wanted. Like when I studied math, I had the discipline to never memorize anything, I wouldn't memorize a quadratic formula, I needed to be able to re-derive it from first principles, which made me very slow at first and then very fast down the road. Not just fast, but more insightful. Because if you ask, what kind of problems can you solve with the quadratic formula, that's fine. But if you ask what led to it being solved, and then what about third order equations? And what about fourth order equations or their roots in fifth order? Oh, there are no roots of fifth order. That's actually one of the famous unsolved problems in mathematics. Why is that an unsolved problem? Is it unsolvable? You start actually learning how to think. Right? You start learning how to sense for yourself. So other people's rulesets that they're offering or their best practices are the result of their own capacity to think and sense and feel. Oftentimes, it's not even their best shit. It's the shit that they think other people who are dumb will be able to get, like most spiritual teachers have wrestled with people just aren't going to get this. I'm going to give them 10 commandments. I'm going to I'm going to tell them chat on the machine via because at least then they won't be like thinking dreadful thoughts all the time. And so oftentimes, the teaching is intentionally down calibrated for what they think people can get. And then people take it as if it's scriptural doctrine, right. So what I would say is, anytime there is a best practice or doctrine you want to ask Where could I be wrong? When might there be an exception to that? What is what is the evaluative basis in me that could even ask or contemplate that question? What led them to come up with that? Are there other guidelines that other people have given on right speech? right action? How do they contrast? How do I weigh them? What is the place in me that can weigh Buddha's guidelines versus Socrates as guidelines? And so take the output of their insight because they were fucking insightful, but don't stop there. This is what Bruce Lee tried to get across with Jeet kundo. Right, like Bruce Lee saw this in the martial arts because the martial arts, which had been so geographically separated that you never got to put them all up against each other. And then he was at the beginning of the time, they all got to be put up against each other and he got to see that the almost religious faith and you know, this branch of kung fu or whatever was a religious faith. It wasn't actually tested and didn't work. And he's like, shit. kung fu doesn't work against wrestling. And that was so devastating that it made him want to take a more empirical approach to it. And so then Jeet Kune Do the formless form was if you have an idea of what right action is ahead of time, you're going to get your ass kicked by someone that can be more responsive than you. But if you can develop lots of capacities and then be profoundly present in the moment to the right action of the moment, without a preconceived thing that makes you rigid, you'll do better. Thank you. Now a lot of people get this wrong. And they take the G kundo insight to like, not not train to think okay, I'll just be present and it's like, no, that type of punch Bruce Lee trained more than anybody that type of kick that type of elbow that type. He trained the fuck out of them showed that he could let them go and know that they could be called. So he didn't hold I'm going to do this type of form. But he had all the tools and he had all the tools have become part of himself. Right?

So I'm just not gonna freestyle jazz that, well, if I can't play scales, I'm just not and the scales are fucking rigid and boring. But then it's getting my fingers accustomed to chords and patterns of notes, where then I can freestyle on it, but nobody wants to hear scales. They want to hear jazz, they want to hear whatever the live thing is that the scales are a training in the capacity, whether it's jazz, or whether it's composing the capacity if I can't actually play, I can't start to sense what sounds good. So there's a willingness to train at scales to know that the goal isn't scales. Right. The goal is something beyond scales, but I probably have to train at scales to get there.

Peter Limberg  52:46  
All right, Nick, you had a question?

Nick  52:54  
Me? 

Peter Limberg  52:55  
Yes, you will be missed.

Nick  53:03  
Hi Daniel, I've started your Dharma inquiry. There 15 questions in but it's, it's quite quite long and incredible. So, I thank you for putting so much work into it. So, my question starts with the famous injunction by work or claim by by Plato all men, by the very nature desire to know, sorry desire to good paraphrase. And while that may be true, our individual perspectives and ignorance of the whole limit our ability to determine what is right in any given prefer any given action because, as he said, there is no algorithm for optimizing for the good a prerequisite for liberating individuals to choose what is truly good must be for them to cultivate the ability and desire to get better at something doing what is truly good at any given moment if that's the case, would it not be irresponsible to just encourage everybody given the current world system to do what they think is good when the likelihood that their notion of good is not actually or it's not actually good or that the probability that it is is very low or that even if it is good it is liable to be co opted by more powerful negative attract

Daniel Schmactenberger  54:27  
This is a super super tricky topic. It's a super important and a super tricky one because yeah, is is protesting and maybe even blowing up an abortion clinic good. Or is funding Planned Parenthood good, right. Like that's exact opposite definitions of activism, based on different moral frameworks. is destroying the infidel good or is destroying fundamentalist religious ideas. Good. Right, like, and so. So then if someone says, Well, your definition of good is not actually good yet, you need to grow up before you should do anything because your definition of good is actually bad. That's why it's quite tricky right? Now, even if it's not examples that are that extreme, this is one of the things that I focus on a lot is that so much of the things that people think are good, are just narrow in their assessment. So they have second order negative consequences that they didn't even know. Right? So sometimes it might be I'm creating a negative consequence for someone else, but I think that's good. My moral framework is limited. Other times I might have a bigger moral framework, but my epistemic framework is limited. I can't calculate second and third order effects well, right. And so I do a form of environmentalism that says you No, let's protect these forests, which includes protecting them from fires that burn up the small amounts of Bush, which ends up leading to much larger forest fires or whatever it is, right, those kinds of misguided things. So there's obviously both an evolution of someone's actual ethical framework, as well as their cognitive framework to be able to see if the second and third order effects of what they do will be aligned with the ethical framework.

Now ultimately, we can say that if people have definitions of the goods that hold themselves as mutually exclusive with each other, that creates inexorable conflict. And if people don't have a level of consideration of how to act on their ethical frameworks that is aligned with the complexity of the scenario, it's much more probable that problems occur than not.

So if we want to have an Now here's where this really becomes an issue, this is a much bigger issue than it used to be, because our ability to make impactful choices is so much bigger because of technology. And if I'm cutting down trees with stone tools, I just can't cut down that many trees. And when it goes to metal axes faster, and chainsaws faster, and D nines that much faster. So now, ethics becomes a much bigger thing when our actions can be that much more consequential and then also when they become fucking distributed systemic actions that no one can see or take responsibility for. So all of the purchases that I make and the people they vote for and how they allocate money in whatever is part of a global supply chain system that is overfishing the oceans and enslaving people in in servitude in China and cobalt mines in Africa whatever I'm causing that shit I'm but I'm not directly causing it, but I can't really choose out of it because there are no really good other options and I become market inviable. So you get the systemic everyone's contributing but no one feels responsible or capable of being responsible. So, if we take, theoretically a way of thinking about it, the way that Forrest Landry reframes it up that I think is really quite critical is that causation and choice are two different types of change. causation is change that is rule based, could be described in computation. And any definition of choice that ends up being choice is something that is not completely subsumed in a rule base. Otherwise, it's basically summed up causation. What we can say is that with science, we actually have a pretty solid theory of causation. Not really when we get down to the micro level. causation doesn't make any sense in quantum mechanics. And even in biology, you have Nexus causation where necessary and sufficient causation doesn't exist in terms of Aristotle's formal calls, almost anywhere. But if we abstract mathematically if we if we go for numerical accuracy rather than perfection, we can say we've got causation pretty clear clear enough that we can make technologies that give us more causal capability. Right? We're talking on this laptop that's a pretty engineering complicated feat that is based off of getting causation, right semiconductors and internets and satellites and stuff. So, we have a pretty robust theory of causation, but we do not have a robust theory of choice. And since science says, There is no such thing as good formally that that is odd distinction is such that science can say what is it can't say what ought, ought is not an objective thing sciences within the objective realm of measurable and repeatable. It says that any definition of ought is epistemicly ungrounded because the only epistemic grounding there is a science. Right. And as a result, what is the basis of ought? What is the basis of good is driving all the power of science applied as technology? Well, it's economics and Game Theory. Right? It's basically who's funding the research towards what purposes. And so what game theory is, and it's it's kind of interesting, the game theory was mathematically formalized by von Neumann, who is arguably the best at is of any scientist, there was right starting to get into the ought side in the context of World War Two. And basically what it said is in an assumed rivalrous context, the good choice is the choice that doesn't lose. So let's just look at how to win. But win means a very narrow set of metrics and a very short timeframe. And it might be externalizing. harms in a way that makes the whole thing self terminate, which it does. So right now we have this massive lever on our choice from technology, but without a commensurate quality of guiding choice. That's an extinction equation that when I talk about generator functions of extra, so that's at the heart of it. So we need a theory of ought that is as robust and fully commensurable, as our theory of is, right, which means we need a kind of reified ethics that is commensurate with the philosophy of science that can actually be a basis of what we should develop technology and service to. That's why I got into I mean, there many people have worked on this obviously, right. And there are good steps. Like, you know, there are good things and what roles did there good things and what many kind of ethical theorists did, I actually found the most robust treatise on the underlying philosophy in the Immanent Metaphysics - Forrest's work - which is why he became a good friend and mentor in that.

So I think it's fair to say, which is very different than how I would talk to anyone, actually. Right, there's an enactment problem here. But I think it's fair to say that if we can make choices that have effects that we don't even realize, and we can't contemplate, but we're making them the chance that things continue to go well as small. And if we are trying to do things that we think are good that cause inexorable conflict with increasing capacity for larger conflict, the chance that things continue to be stable, too small. So figuring out how to find what in everyone's values, what is the essence and the values that maybe with a different strategy can be not mutually exclusive OR command somehow inter commensurate with all the other values? And so that's a evolution of a more inclusive ethical framework, and then a more complex epistemic framework that can actually calculate the cause and effect the information theory enough to say what is an appropriate technology or injunction or whatever. Those two things together are necessary for humanity to continue to do well. 

Nick  1:03:07  
So your conversation last week? It sounds like what you're what you're getting to is that we absolutely need to be able to deploy a unified metaphysical assessment of what is here and now for everyone that is able to achieve a higher order perspective that can give us a better understanding of the second or third order consequences of our actions in order for us to choose.

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:03:40  
No, I think that some people need to be thinking about that, but most people don't need to be thinking about a fundamental integrated metaphysics as the basis they simply need to have a better quality conversation with people who disagree. So it'll be emergent rather than top down right asking "Can I get formal philosophy right and do everything from there" is one direction But the other direction is, can we have a better quality dialectic discussion, where I realized that the thing that I really want to move forward will keep getting fucked up by the group that doesn't want it if I can't cooperate. And that is shelling style game theory where I'm figuring out how to cooperate rather than just defect defect is still better game theory for for me for my own interests. So let me see if I can understand what they want what they value and find a version of that, that I can empathize with. And maybe a version of the thing that I like that they can empathize with, that can allow us to work together rather than me always having to be achieving anything through war. That will actually do for the most part. If people are simply oriented to dialectic, what they'll find is that I don't give a fuck about those owls or whatever it is, we need better jobs, right? Let's because they were, they were given a proposition that made those two things mutually exclusive. And that if I don't get to open that power plant that's going to give jobs because of the owls that everybody's still fucking poor here and living on food stamps. Well, it doesn't have to be that way. Could the power plant be somewhere else? Could we relocate the owls could be any number of things. That was a stupid proposition. And we shouldn't start with that proposition. We should start with, I don't want my kids to be on food stamps, right? I want them to be able to go to school and buy clothes and do better. Okay, that's actually fair, I get that and the people who are going for the owls don't have to make enemies out of them. And then we actually want to protect the forest. Well, those guys who are hunters will actually like the forest and they like owls. It's that there was a forced theory of trade offs. It doesn't have to be. So stop the proposition and stop having the conversation in the context of this candidate or that or yes or no on this proposition and come back to what we care about. You want you want to not be in poverty. We want to not destroy all the forest. Okay, well I would like forests, I would like not poverty, is there a better solution? Can we come up with a better solution other than the forced proposition that was given? What what we find is that none of no base values are actually mutually exclusive with any other base values. And not only they're not mutually exclusive, but the things that I care about are harmed by things that I don't currently realize that I care about. In a more interconnected system. I do this thing that seems to get my people ahead or my cause ahead for the short term and then genders emnity that ends up damaging my cause longer term. So people will evolve to have a value system that is more inclusive when they see the causal connections more and when they're not forced into a mindset of war based on false theory of trade offs. And so you can start with metaphysics and try to derive from there or you can simply start with a vector direction in the direction of good conversation, which will eventually converge towards a better metaphysics.

Nick  1:07:01  
So, last comment. It sounds like you're suggesting that the while I'm wondering if there's any other rate limiter that you can think of other than education, in this case, to vector towards better discussion.

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:07:20  
Oh, yeah. Right now people are being driven in the direction of maximally bad capacity for discussion by the info tech platforms and the nature of media and the nature of politics. Like the massive biggest systems. So you know, the fact that the Facebook algorithms and the YouTube algorithms are still optimizing for time on site and the time on site is best optimized by appealing to bias and limbic hijacks. That is an AI applied against everyone. And it's winning. It's just fucking beating everyone at controlling their own thoughts. And moving them all towards the incapacity. I think it's really important to understand that the AI that governs Facebook's newsfeed is a much, much more advanced AI than the one that beat Kasparov at chess. And it's beating everyone at controlling what they think and they don't realize it. And it's making everyone more outraged and more dumb and more certain at the same time. And so that is whatever that's saurons Ring of Power, right? Like that is a that is directly against everything that we're interested in. And then, within that context, everyone's need to compete with what is most salacious and short to that will get to short attention spans and the limbic hijack competition. And then politicians that are oriented not around truth, but effective rhetoric, like all of that is exactly against quality conversation. So people have to basically extract themselves from that whole machinery Realize that the whole thing is Moloch or the whole thing's a fuckin paperclip Maximizer and say, I want to learn how to understand people in that I don't currently understand non pejoratively. Thank you.

Peter Limberg  1:09:23  
Thanks, Nicholas. So we reached our allotted time today. Might be prudent to stop here unless you want to sneak in another question Daniel. Do you so maybe just just one more question then if, if we have the time. Maybe you had a really good question above. If you can unmute yourself and ask it.

Maybe Gray  1:09:51  
Hi, yes. Thank you so much, Daniel. I really appreciated how you brought in Buddhist and Hindu and Jain missed distinctions. How do you understand Dharma and my understanding of contemplado societies and communities is that it's a very experiential practice. So I was really curious about how you phenomenal phenomenologically experience Dharma and how you can discern the distinction between when it is in alignment with your path and when it is not in an embodied, experimental way.

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:10:37  
Question when, when people use the phrases like following your joy or following your bliss, there's something that is kind of in the direction of right but I would describe it differently, which is... I don't experience what feels like Dharma as being joyful all the time. Sometimes it is sometimes it's sadness. Sometimes it's anger. Sometimes it feels fairly neutral. I experienced it as what feels like wholeness. And if there is a time where there's something that I'm authentically sad about something that I really care about that's been harmed, and I was just feeling joyful like I would, there would be something wrong with me. If, but in the moment of feeling that sadness, I feel no conflict about it. Like every part of me feels fully aligned with something that isn't saying the universe is wrong and saying that there's something that is that I love that's sacred to me that got harmed or that I missed and I'm feeling a feeling that feels like right relationship with reality. So there's a lack of internal conflict. When my mind, my heart, my feelings, my sensibility, are all on the same page. Right? And so in that moment, if I feel sad, or I feel angry or feel blissful, or I feel whatever I feel no part of me wants to feel different. So that feels like wholeness and right relationship with life. And it includes the full spectrum of the human experience. So there is a sense for me of something that feels like right relationship with life. It feels like internal congruency. It feels like and as a result, there's a kind of peace that is associated. Even if some of what the emotion I'm experiencing about the object level issue is fear.. right, there's a kind of piece that I'm actually where I should be. Now, that doesn't mean that I'm sure everything is going to go well based on some finite definition of go well, but it means that I'm relating to it as best I can. And that's the there's a kind of peace in that.

That's one of the things I would say, in my phenomenology and my experience.

The other thing I think, I would say is that there's a feeling like reverence and like devotion at the basis of any other feeling.

There is a sense of the actual meaningfulness and sacredness of life beyond a cognitive model of what meaningful or sacred meaning there's a felt sense of it. That is the basis of what right action would mean. That is felt. So if I'm sad about something, there's at the heart of that sadness is a sense of something sacred, right? They got harmed or that was lost or whatever, but there's a sacredness that I'm connected to. If I'm, if I'm feel impassioned to go work on something that in passion comes from something that I hold a sacred that I feel a devotion to the devotion is my relationship to the sacred and what I feel reverence for. Yeah, I think that feeling is always there accompanying any of the other feelings. And that doesn't mean it's always in the forefront of the mind but it cannot Always be tuned into.

Peter Limberg  1:15:08  
Alright, I think that's Maybe do you have any follow up?

Maybe Gray  1:15:12  
No, that was really wonderful. Thank you so much.

Peter Limberg  1:15:19  
And that's an excellent question to end off on. Daniel, is there anything you want to like? tie this up in a bow? Before I close up?

Daniel Schmactenberger  1:15:31  
I know that the Stoa videos, disabled comments. So I don't know if there is a way for people to share what they found useful. What was confusing what they didn't resonate with feedback. But if there is a way I would love to hear it. And I hope there were some things that were useful and if you end up exploring those Dharma questions, that would be cool. And if this ends up being a community where people explore some of that together, as someone asked how to how do we find people that can kind of help us in this, if they were groups of people that we're building trust and able to support each other with authentic reflections towards what they were aspiring in the direction of? That would be really cool to see.

Peter Limberg  1:16:26  
Very cool. So if I'll chat with you offline, I'm happy to leave the comments open for the YouTube page. There's a kind of a philosophy that I'm happy to be challenged on why I do that for the stoa channel. But we also have a discord which is found right here. So you can continue this conversation. And we also have that Google Doc which I can share with you, Daniel, which I think people are writing comments in there. So that being said, Thank you, my friend for coming back to the store. You'll be back. I think October as a sense maker in residence at the same time, the Mondays and October at 7:30pm. Eastern time. It's called the digital porch. And we decided just to go in with these with with no agenda, no theme or anything like that. Just kind of like start like, like Xeno did in the original Stoa. You know, this is this chat and have questions. So I'm quite excited for that.

To plug Some upcoming events tomorrow. Sara Ness. She has an event she's from the authentic lighting revolution. And she does she do something called quarantine community and exploration is going to be interactive using some kind of authentic relating principles and techniques which should be fun. And then Brett Weinstein is going to come in on September 21 at 6:30pm eastern time to do a talk about his unity 2020. So bring your questions stress testing, you can RSVP there and the stoah If you feel called inspired to support it to have more sessions like this, we've offered for 300 sessions since the pandemic and offer free to address the mental health crisis the meaning crisis and the meta crisis. So you can support us on Patreon there. That being said, we'll go for a bio break and then I'm going to take our boy Tyson and and he's going to reintroduce the flowing with unknowingness. So if you have to go, that's the time to go. If you just want to hang out and watch a little bit, I recommend doing that.

Thank you, everyone.

