Peter Limberg  0:00  
Hello, you beautiful podcast listeners. Welcome to another episode of The Stoa podcast. So this episode is a reposting of a Stoa session that happened yesterday, called practice to collective wisdom. presence, warm data and insight with Bonnitta Roay, Nora Bateson and Ria Baeck. So this was a three way emergent conversation. It was awesome. explained more about how it came about in the actual session so you can listen to that when it starts. Yeah, that being said, we're gonna have more sessions like this. Ria, Bonnitta, Nora, they really enjoyed themselves. There was over 100 people in the Zoom Room. It was a lot of fun, a lot of great energy. And yeah, yeah, Stoa is exciting right now. There's a lot of life here. And if you look at the upcoming schedule, lots of lots of events coming up. I'll plug one right now. And that is Daniel Schmactenbergers event that's happening this Monday at 7:30pm. Eastern Time. On Dharma inquiry, he has his Dharma inquiry questions, amazing questions that are that's kind of going viral in our sense making web and so he's going to discuss them and we're gonna have an exercise around them. And it's gonna be awesome. Also check out Yeah, there's this event on Sunday 5pm Eastern Time, called Dying East and West with Daniel P. Brown. Daniel P. Brown is associate professor of psychology at the Harvard Medical School. And he's going to talk about death from Western and Eastern perspective. So that should be really Cool, you can RSVP to those events and many more events on the website, thestoa.ca, which will be on the show notes. And if you like what we're doing here at the Stoa, if you'd like to keep listening to these podcasts, and then the videos on the YouTube and the live events, feel free to support us on Patreon. We have over 90 patrons right now. And it just, you know, fills me up with gratitude warms my heart that people are resonating with this project and want to support it. And the more support we get, the more I can do this full time and, you know, the more fun we can have here and really, really steal this culture together. So that will be on the show notes. Other than that, enjoy this this episode.

Raven Connely  2:51  
The Stoa as a digital campfire, where we coherent dialogue about what matters most at the knife's edge of what's happening now.

Peter Limberg  2:59  
We'll begin. Nora has not arrived yet. Please. I don't think she's here. But I suggest we start and then up and eat and Rhea kind of a conversation and hopefully Noah, Nora arrives. So welcome to stoah for those of you who have been here are first timers still has a place for us to cohere and dialogue about what matters most a nice edge what's happening now and Peter Limburg steward of the stoah and today we have a need to Roy, Nora Bateson and Ria Baeck here for a three way emerging conversation. So just a quick intro, which I scraped off of their bios. If you if you don't know these three ladies, but Bonnitta is an award winning author, philosopher and site guide. Nora Bateson is an award winning filmmaker, writer and educator. And Ria is in a transformational change profession. who discovered the modality called collective presencing. And these, Nora, Bonnitta, and Ria are friends of the Stoa. They've been here before and how this session came about is Bonnitta is like lets have a three-way conversation with myself Nora, and Ria. And there's not many rules of the Stoa but one of them is what Bonnitta wants, Bonnitta gets and so i'm like, let's do it. And and I think Nora said, like, let's have no theme, no structure, let's just go in for a conversation. So we just like, let's throw it up there. And the and here we are. So how is going to work? It's going to take in Bonnitta in to set the frame and hopefully Nora arrives but if not, we'll make do as good meta stoics and, and then they'll have a conversation and then if you have any questions throughout, just throw it in the chat box, and then at some point, I imagine to be a pivot to some collective questioning. So that being said, I will allow everyone to unmute themselves. Everyone keeps themselves on mute, except Bonnitta and Ria at this point. So I'll take you in no meter.

Bonnitta Roy  5:15  
Okay, um, um, so we had a little brief back and forth to see how we might frame this. You know, the title is wisdom practices, and there's collective presence, warm data, insight practice. So what are these three have in common? There's a sense in which I mean, it's very obvious to me that what Ria and Nora bring is that they're the few people that I know that truly understand holistic complexity that a truly take nonlinear systems dynamics seriously in their work, they do not compromise and I know from my own work.

There are times when you do a workshop, and there are people who are very complex thinkers, very sophisticated intelligence that do a lot of their due diligence. And they, they use the term complexity systems or systems complexity. But there's a sense in which you can tell they're mind mapping all these feed loops that maybe feed forward and feedback, as if theoretically, you could get in the system and see all the parts and how they're related. And that's not what holistic systems are. You can't get in between action and reaction, you see. And so there's always a challenge when you're working in this field, to try to point out to people that No, that's not what you're talking about. Like, no, that's just not it. It's, and it's frustrating because these people really do the due diligence, put a lot of work and effort into it. And yet there's a kind of a hard boundary to just not in this holistic non linear approach they're just not. And I know that Ria has is uncompromised, because she point this out in our own work together. And the first time I met Nora, I was asking her about her father, and I was saying, you know, it's hard to read him because he uses terms like cybernetics. And I was like, Well, what is he really getting at? And she just laid out this view of the nature of reality, the nature of the world. That was truly in the in what I call holistic complexity. I just use that term to separate it from systemic complexity and So I'm kind of stalling because I Nora is going to be here very shortly. But but this is the seed that we want to try to how can we how can we better language or point out this the difference? And do we have stories or examples and how we how we kind of deal with that in this field? So, um, yeah, that's what we're hoping to build that wisdom skill of truly inhabiting nonlinear dynamics in a holistic system.

So when Nora comes in, we can ask you the same question. So right Question for you Ria, is, like how do you how do you point out the difference like how do you how do you how do you help people move from maybe where they're stuck to a view that's truly holistic or nonlinear

Peter Limberg  9:20  
Just jump in Nora has a just arrived, I believe.

Bonnitta Roy  9:24  
Oh, great. Yeah,

Nora Bateson  9:25  
I made it. Okay. I hear you fine. I just had one of those zoom panic nothing opens nothing works. Ah, so But But anyway, here I am. Hi, bad. Did I miss?

Bonnitta Roy  9:46  
You didn't miss anything I was stalling. And basically, Oh, there you are, and basically talked about how we were going to talk about nonlinear thinking and how I said that I could count on my hands number of people I think really don't count really are don't compromise nonlinear thinking when they address systems complexity. And of course, you You too are two people that that I know that to be the case, and I was talking about in my own work, and I'm sure this is our I'm guessing this is for you to you'll be working with people and they'll use the word complexity systems or complex thinking but they're not really doing that. They actually come You know, have a lot of like, linear if they could theoretically they think they could mind map, you know, they're always coming up with these mind maps, you know, of all this complex. And so, how do you language or what, how do you build that skill that people can exit that, you know, and I was saying like, a lot of times these people, they've done so much due diligence, they read, they study our work, and yet they're still kind of like that. Click has happened where Oh my god, now I get it. So that was the ramp up and you know if you have stories or anyway we can illustrate this

Nora Bateson  11:12  
oh so many stories and, and I guess for me part of that has to do with with the tension of being caught in a culture where what is expected at a professional level and in circles of changemaking, etc. Not just changemaking organizational development academic work around systemic thinking is that there is some way to solve it. And, and there's something deeply entrenched, I don't know you know, we can call it mechanistic. We can call it linear, we can call it that. Whatever, whatever that thing is, it's some kind of control assumption. And you can use all the vocabulary in the book, you can talk about emergence and you can talk about interdependency and interconnectedness and inter relatedness. And you can talk about coupling and decoupling and complexity. And and the second you start with the idea that you're going to have a goal more than likely, or you have any kind of measurements in the process of getting to that goal, boom, you lost it. And there's just not very many circumstances in which it's acceptable to approach the difficult situations of our world without measurements and goals. So I don't know where the issue is, is it is it in the Actual perception of complexity or is it in the way that there is an expectation to be in the world around? It seems like there's some paradoxical reflective issues happening at that level.

Ria Baeck  13:19  
Yeah. I want to pick up from there. I think the mold that we are in the thinking mold of Western thinking and that's what I learned from you, Bonnie is that very, very either/or, and it's either a solution or it's either not the solution. It's good or it's bad or it's light tones, darker and even It's the, to actually grasp that you live in complexity. And that even if you try all these maps or the actual experience, of, of and in some way we know that life is not linear. I mean, we try to have friends and relationships and then they stop and even against our will and our expectation.

But there's, it seems like we have to bring ourselves out of the mold of that dualistic thinking that is so ingrained and too adapt something else, which is very fluid and very not clear. For many people that's like, because I think we are educated like okay one one is do and if you do this then that and which is all that linear thinking. And what I find when I try to explain the difference between complicated and complex as Dave Snowden brings it that let people understand that in a complex system, they actually have agency. I've worked quite a lot with people from European Commission and They kind of understand complexity, and then they fall back into what we are in the hierarchy. And so nothing can happen. So don't get that. You never know how the ripples are going to ripple out or whatever you do as an individual might influence something. And that to me is is like some, some, some, some, not some some crucial thing there.

Bonnitta Roy  16:43  
Yeah, I think that's a really good distinction. So, you know, yeah, you'll hear you'll hear people get more sophisticated and talking about systems thinking. So they don't want to say they're trying to control the system, then they'll say like, mitigate, or we want to be resilient or you Want to adapt? All these things are hedging that you can hear that they hedge their bet. And, and so I was what I was listening to I thinking of like, okay, we live in a complex volatile world, every single person who says that the whole reason why they're saying it is like so what do we do about it to make it less complex and more volatile? Like the the whole meme is sits in that frame? Right. So like, that is and and we so we need to investigate the mental model behind the discourse and what you said, Ria,  it was, I think it's really, really significant. And that is to have no control to not to be able to mitigate and not be able to manage doesn't mean you don't have agency and that is a huge distinction because it For myself, when I get to thinking, well, do we just know, the problem? See the for me the problem with that the way I address it is you in complex systems, you, you don't want to de animate any of the players, let's say. And so to think you don't have agency, the enemy to you as a player and says the system has all the agency, right? But you don't want to de animate the system or parts of the system as if I can operate on it without some kind of mutuality. So I think that was a big, big distinction. And I was going to ask, like, Is there a choice possible in this in complexity? And so this notion of, well, maybe not the agency is or something that's a really interesting distinction.

Nora Bateson  18:53  
I like to talk about that in terms of a paradox because if you think It is a paradox right? You You You are you and you know Bonnitta is is particularly Bonnitta ish. You know, and and Ria is particularly Ria ish. And and that particularity is your complexity, it's your, your, your know, your history, your your everything is in there, the way you perceive a situation what you might do in response to it has everything to do with your frame, your, your language, your whatever your DNA, your I mean, everything is in there. But when you actually look at where all that comes from, it comes from the contexts around you. And so, in fact, you know, you quickly get into a paradox of will is any of this stuff that's I think, is me actually me, or is it from the context and, and I, I refer to this as the paradox of agency and what's really useful about this paradox is as long as you can keep from solving it, you're in good shape. 

And that is that it keeps this kind of living, taught attention. And by taught I don't mean teaching, I mean taught as in tight as in as in pulled, stretched, stretched attention to, to kind of both as being What's there? Yes, I am. I am. I'm responding to the context that I'm around. In that sense. I don't have any agency. You know, you can vote for Biden or you can vote for Trump. Choose! Um, and, and is that agency, or is that a choice that set up within the meta contexts and, and pattern earnings of an existing system. So our Do you have free will? Or is it determined Oh, this is old stuff, but basically, the paradox is what's interesting. And that paradox, for me is something that keeps it keeps the humility and it keeps the questioning and it keeps the dance and the toggle going between those different processes so that I mean, I guess it's Harare, right who's talking about free will and he says, If you think you have free will, you don't have any because the especially in an algorithms, tech space, you're not actually making any choices. You're choosing between what's been given to you to choose from. But the second you realize you don't have any Free Will you get a little bit and there it is, again, that paradox For me, this ties into, again that that attention to a way of being that is essentially in constant communication with the relationships and where they go. Right. So you're, what you do is not what you do. It's what you do, and how that goes to the next thing. And the next multiple things that how each path enters you into more paths or enters the situation and tomorrow. That's how relationships build relationships.

Ria Baeck  22:44  
Yeah, like to pick up on that, Nora. I think that's important that to actually have that holistic complexity view as as Bonnie names it, that you start understanding Way more of the relationships that are constantly going instead of how I used to look long time ago is like, Okay, I'm here, and you're over there. And that's it as if there was nothing in between. But and and if you really embody understand and body complexity, then you understand that there is this constant influence going all over the place from you towards you. And, and it's that, that that thinking of we are in this skin and that is me. And then if I talk to you, maybe we have a relationship But otherwise not and that's Yes, something so fundamentally wrong is not the right word. But that that doesn't work to understand how complex life actually happens.

Bonnitta Roy  24:24  
For me, it reminded me of something Schopenhauer said he said, I can walk, I can will what I want. But I can't will that I will. And so, for me, it's like it's trying. Yes, it's a paradox. I see it as tumbling perspectives, but trying to get a proper felt sense on what you're saying, Nora, which is beautiful. And that is if I look at it from a certain viewpoint, The context life is giving me I don't have the choice but to act as if I were free. And that was not up to me. And so it's like, um, there's a larger intelligence in that design. And when then I asked myself if I free will yes or no, I'm actually creating a context in which it can't be known, right? You just get into pickle, some kind of conceptual pickle. 

But you can have these experiences where you have this strong felt sense that I don't have the choice not to be an agent. I don't have the choice to be a choiceless. I don't have the choice to not have free will But there they are. I can't I neither can I get out of acting? As if and so for me, I always believe the action the felt sense, the embodied experience more than the pickle my mind can't solve. It's like okay, well, language is to coarse an instrument to solve this pickle. But then you can have these experiences. And I don't want to hedge like, then I'm an individual. That's that's, that's not the point. And, and I think that like so why does it matter and I think that we would all probably agree that relating to holistic complexity is more is has something to do with the kind of processing your body does or your actions and your feelings and your senses. And if you can learn there's a sense in which you can learn to trust those It's not like then you get out of this system. And you can pick a direction. But there's a way in which your communion or communication with the systems shows you things that were hidden in plain sight, let's say, shows you like why i was running around in circles. And really there's a direct link from here to there that I didn't see and it was easy shows you that you make a move. And you know, like those ripples have more effect on the context than your little move and that they will be disclosed to you eventually. And now you're starting to feel agency in the system, then and it's very powerful.

Ria Baeck  27:59  
Okay, I want to tell a story when I was training in systemic constellations, some of you might know what that is. And I was stunned, confused. Because my teacher used systemic constellations, and there was systemic thinking. And I sensed because I'm a very kinesthetic person, there was a difference. And I asked him, like, why are they using the same word systemic? Because to me, it's not the same. And he said, I think what we mean, as is that, you, you understand that you're part of the system. You cannot study the system from outside as if there is a system and I'm here, but I'm always implied, whatever I do, and that was from I mean this now I don't know how long time ago but that was for me such a Yeah, a deep understanding about

Nora Bateson  29:14  
Alright, I want to go into that thing that that Bonnie you started exploring there around the felt sense and the the 'stay with it' and what's in there? because I think you know there's a lot of people who are so they're they're looking for a methodology for how to get there and it's a tricky space to actually put words on because there's all sorts of of possible possibilities for responding in in any kind of systemic situation, and not all of them are going to resonate in multiple contextual processes simultaneously. And, in particular, I think one of the things for me that there are a couple things that come up here. And one is that it seems to require, you know, we'd like to talk about trust, but it seems to actually require a kind of distrust, a kind of abandonment of what the given set of explorations might be to solve the problem in thinking, okay, but I know none of that's going to work. All of that is going to end up in some sort of reductionist frame. And so, there is a you know, a part of me and this this is something that I think matures over time. And at first it might sound negative, it might sound. It might sound critical, but actually I'm not coming from there in my life, my experience with with, with the most sort of singing tingling responses to systemic issues, those those responses come after you give up on the existing set of pathways. So that seems to be one piece of that. 

Um, another thing is that it's never where you think it's going to be. So if you start off thinking you're talking about education, or you start off thinking you're talking about, you know, a medical issue where that other thing is going to come from is almost 100% of the time somewhere else. It's going to come from another context and it's not going to look like any of the things on your list of what you're looking for. And, and so there is there's that piece of it. And there's another thing that has to do with recognizing those things when they turn up. And that's, for me, that's that's a lifetime's work. And it isn't. It isn't something that you do as a profession. It's something in the way that you live. You don't get to decide when that form of perception or that those habits of thinking about things are turned on or turned off. It's not when you're on the job. It's not when you're teaching your systemic solutions course. It's, it's, it's all the time and so I Guess that those things are so interesting to me. 

And I certainly saw that, you know, with my dad and his later years, I wasn't around for his younger years, but it was something remarkable. Because those things would actually be in the immediate perception for him. I have to wait a little while and know that I'm going to have to get out of the habit of looking for this thing that I think I'm looking for. So that my, it's almost like your eyes have to retrain to get back. You know, when you get especially when there's an urgent situation responding to that urgency becomes very focused, and and there's a need to have that focused move. So that these other things can can pop into into your peripheral vision. But But where are they? How am I What does that look like? And so for me, I think that that process is a deep one. And it takes a long time and it takes a lot of courage. Because usually there is an expectation that the solution is going to be definable in linear relationship to what has been identified as a problem. And generally, it just isn't it comes out of the sidelines, out of some other context.

Bonnitta Roy  34:37  
Yeah, I wanna, I want to expand on the negativity because you remain so graceful through it. And kind of like bring this stuff practical affairs and, and so like, I agree with you, you have to hit bottom Like you're just so tired of doing the same, it's not only that it's in the wrong direction is exacerbates the problem you're trying to solve. Right? And you're so tired of that. And so the so what happens is like, when you're working in these spaces, people that are on the Stoa sensemaking community, it's very frustrating because again, you see the same kind of effort, the same kind of there's a lot of novelty into the grammar or the or the modeling and yet again, and you just want to like pull me, this is my, my experience. I just want to pull my hair out. And you don't want to get negative because there's something in the human condition that is flourishing and people are trying and then you have to turn that lens on you and say, No, it's okay. This is this is this is part of it, too. Make, like a. And so the question like one of the things that I, the way I talk about it is you, you? 

Well, one of the things that I think poisons the well, in these conversations when I start pulling my hair out, is I have a very strong critique of a Darwinian attitude of complex adaptive processes because everybody's adapting to everyone else. It's just a, it's just a global reaction cycle. Right? We're adapting the climate climate adapting to us and the markets. It's everything. It's like, you know, nuclear weapons and defense and finance and prices and vaccines and immune system. We're in a closed loop. And so for me, in complex adaptive systems thinking, you say, Well, what do we do now? What do we end up and I turn it into a process. Trying to combine process philosophy with complex thought and say, what is possible from here? Wow, this is a surprise. What is possible from here and so there's a sense of constantly being rebooted. And I like to tell the story. I read it in Carl white in one of Carl White's books in it, it's about he tells a story about this indigenous Hunter Hunter tribe in northern Canada or Norway. I can't remember Greenland maybe. And their ritual for hunting elk has evolved holistically because it's just an old evolutionary process. Nobody thought of it. And what they do seems seems seems like magical thinking to us they after they finish using an eating every part of the elk, they take the shoulder bone from the elk and it has to be The left or right, I can't remember it's the ritual. And the elders who are skilled, they put the shoulder bowl blade over the fire and where the crack comes is where they head out in the next direction. And he says, the reason why he says they're not stupid, really, they know that elk drink down at the water hole at four o'clock. But if you get in that kind of like direct control mentality, then the elk gets smarter, and the whole system gets harder and harder to commune. So what they do is they introduce randomness into the process, and on the way they discover more about their landscape. And they and they improve contexts that they don't even know they're improving. And the elk don't just become afraid of them. And then the The dance and the mutuality is served by inserting by this this relationship they have with randomness and, and surprise and so yeah, so when I hear hear people speaking in terms of complex, complex adaptive systems, I think it's not radical enough. It's it's in the Darwinian attitude, and it just escalates it escalates action reaction cycles to the point that that's what we have everywhere now. Um, so that was my negative rant. I'll put it out there.

Nora Bateson  39:48  
All right. No, though, it's so frustrating. Because you know, when you start bringing in anything that is, you know what we live in a world of direct correctives And if you operate in complex systems with direct correctives, you are gonna make consequences that and consequences have consequences that you might be sorry, you made.  So, so yeah, detours and, and and relational contours and dances and things that are that bring that the expression that I like to use is that the shape of the response needs to meet the shape of the trouble. But what we do is we make the shape of the response match the shape of the trouble. And if it matches, that's a problem. But if it meets it, it's going to meet other things too. Um, but go ahead Ria, and then maybe we can give some examples later. Yeah, I interrupted you. Sorry.

Ria Baeck  40:57  
No, no So it wasn't I don't think I was going to say something. Let me check that one, actually to pick something up from from the what was mentioned before that I think you Nora meant the felt sense. And then Bonnie said something about embodiment and sensing. And I would say in in that gap where we actually can act, and of course we we live in contexts, that's for sure. And that drives our choices. Yes. But there is, yeah, why do we do what we do? Why? Why did I end up here? I mean, if I look at my history, not was expecting me to be here. I will say to them I'm just a little Flemish girl, you know, like, from workers family and but there seems to be a sense that we can be in touch I call it just life, life energy and, and having a sense and sometimes a very clear sense of that's what I need to do and that's something I cannot not do if I'm really um if I take myself seriously and my senses and in that way I, I always have advice for people like make sure you you know your body you know what is going on, you know That what are these subtle clues that you can sense in yourself but also like what you said Nora to actually notice when the emergence happened or that that other strange thing that actually helps.  You need to be nice sense sensible sensitive is about the word I guess, to actually notice like, hey, he was something let's let's pick it up and not let it float away with in the normal thinking and Oh, that was just a small detail and we don't pay attention. So there's a lot of want to put a lot of attention on. Get to know your instrument your body as an instrument, besides all the thinking, of course not throw that away, but do actually have that also available.

Bonnitta Roy  44:18  
Ah, yeah, and I know I'm I forgotten Robert's here on this call, I think he has worked toward, you know, trying to try to language like perception is a skill he keeps going it's kind of the this core theme of something that he's trying to work out him in his work, I think is a part of that, you know, this perception is you know, we think perceptions is frozen in time, you know, by the time you're five years old or whatever the thing works, right. And then then we go on to teach something else. But the question is, I'm writing a philosophy of education book and I argue that Perception itself everything that is the core itself, the core perceptual sensory motor itself needs to develop over time, along with other layers. And it's not just a step like development, okay? You can walk your mouth works, right, you can see things. And then now we're gonna pile things on top of that. And so.. 

Nora Bateson  45:33  
It's great when you're trying to talk about language and your dogs just kick in. So, yeah, I guess where they, I want to kind of bring in there is that it's, it's also back to that context thing, like how much of the way that you or I or any one of you know us or anyone see The world is actually them seeing the world, and how much of that perception is actually shared perception. And I think this is where maybe sometimes when I want to pull my hair out, Bonnie, it's, it's at this place where there's a shared perception. And I'm not, I'm not I, you know, for whatever reason, I'm on the other side of a one way valve and I can't go back to perceiving it that way. And I get, I feel, um, I guess that recognition that perception isn't something that's just at the level of individual. And so when we talk about how it grows over time, it's also about how it's growing in between us over time. You know, words that come into the language or, or concepts that come into culture or, or experiences that are shared that shift the ability to perceive. It's, it's that you know, you can when you add a Coronavirus to the perception that suddenly there's another way of actually of perceiving complexity. Right? If you happen to be looking for it, not for everybody, but if you happen to be looking for it, and that sheds a very different light on education, it sheds a very different light on economy. it sheds a very different light on on systemic racism, for example, the way that it was possible to perceive systemic racism after the coronavirus was different. It's like the alchemy of perception changed. And then it was it because a lot of people were looking at the systemic issues. Suddenly, it was possible to see, you know, something else happen. So this this, it had always been there. 

So, I think it, I guess one of the reasons I'm saying this is that I want to be really careful about getting somehow into a linear education process for how to perceive in this way, or that there's levels of ability to perceive in this way and that they can be somehow identified. Which, which drives me crazy, because I, you know, work with little kids who are doing really fantastic trans contextual perception and description and people from lots of different cultures at many different edges. levels and levels of experience of betrayal in the systems and and levels of living in levels of emergency that you would might think would preclude the possibility to have such beautiful abstract thinking and to have the luxury of pontificating and exploring in this way, when you have to actually deal with in your face emergency and yet in those moments, there are definitely a lot of people who are right on it. So I just wanted to say that because it can it can be perceived that there's some sort of leveling up. And I don't... I think that's the wrong metaphor to bring in. So I just want to bring that so that we have it in our.  Yeah, yeah.

How are you dogs Bonnie?

Bonnitta Roy  50:30  
There settled down.  I was wondering if we want to do other questions, Peter?

Peter Limberg  50:41  
Sure. Sounds good. So if you have any questions, throw them in the chat. Kim, I see that you have a question. If you can unmute yourself and ask. 

Bonnitta Roy  50:56  
If I also I think you the mic have been have a Google Doc that that they've been populating also. Oh, wow.

Peter Limberg  51:05  
Yeah. Cool. 

Bonnitta Roy  51:07  
And way ahead of the game.

Peter Limberg  51:14  
So they have a section maybe. How do we engage in nonlinear thinking? Maybe that's something we can riff on. Well, we have some questions. Come in the chat box.

Nora Bateson  51:30  
I see Adam has one

Peter Limberg  51:35  
Adam, you can unmute yourself.

Adam  51:41  
actually started writing this down. While you were talking with.. 

Peter Limberg  51:50  
your mics, pretty muffled Adam. Yeah.

Adam  51:54  
Well, you know, I think I need to make an adjustment here. Why don't we move on to somebody else?

Peter Limberg  52:00  
All right, Jacob, do you have a question?

Jacob  52:07  
Hi there, Hi ladies. 

So don't take this personally, because it's just a general frustration I have, and I'm seeing play out a bit here. And maybe you can clear it up. And I'll view this thing completely different. I'm open to that. But I hear this thing happening where like, I hear all these ideas that are, some of them are good, some are bad, right? Some. And those those the good, the bad ones are good. And the good ones are good. The ones that I hate are the ones that are contrary Super contradictive. So you have like, I've heard, like at least 74 ideas that contradict each other here with the same mouth. And so and then, thanks for laughing because this isn't good. Hope you see it's coming from a good place. I just care about this a lot. is what I see happening is that there'll be a contradictory idea and then people claim paradox. It's like, well, oh, there's paradoxes in the universe, me forgive ourselves for contradictions. Because actually paradoxes are really, really rare. They're like rare birds that are beautiful and that, like, you can't claim them all the time, like a sparrow isn't a paradox. You know, I'm saying like, they're rare birds. And so what's mostly happening is contradictions are being called paradoxes. Because if you call contradictions, paradoxes, then you leave them alone. But you need to if you know, something's not a paradox, but a contradiction, you have to you have to confront it and deal with it. So do you have a mechanism in place when you're speaking and listening to make a distinction between paradox and contradiction? Because if we don't, we shouldn't even talk. I mean, I take that back. But we shouldn't be in authority. Because we have to be able to do that. So do you have some sort of mechanism in place that can do that? Thanks. Thanks. Thanks for listening.

Bonnitta Roy  53:48  
Yeah, so that's where you can bring that kind of rigor to this work. And so I'm I agree with you that you Most paradoxes and contradictions I use the word pickle, most contradictions that we're calling paradoxes. You can see that the semantic you're, you're basically using words from one mental model and making some kind of category error in another mental model. And you haven't, you haven't I call it semantic mapping, you haven't cleared out the clutter. So you're using the word for example. We made one distinction between agency and control. Okay, so what you need to do, in fact, most if not all of them, get solved. I don't actually believe that in that in the end, you hold paradox. So if you look at the work of Ralph Stacy, that's where he gets to. But there's a move in which you can see the paradox arises in a context a mental model that you've set up that necessarily ... moves you toward paradox if you reason within it. And if you can see the limitations of your mental model, then the paradox goes away, or the contradiction. I'm, I'm talking about those things we call paradoxes that you're saying are contradictions. So. So there is a metacognitive move that will resolve, in my opinion, all of them. 

But you have to see you set up the pickle in the first place, by the way, you're semantically mapping within a ... mental model. So for example, I give you just an easy one. When we're talking about complex systems, people might say something and you realize that what they're saying is because they can only say that if they have a mental model of a certain type of causation. You can hardly say it. You can highly say, This happens because or whatever without inserting this mental model of causation. And because you're trying to talk about holistic emergence, but you're somehow implied this meant this this theory of change, there's some theory of causation, you'll come up with a paradox. And then you'll realize, Oh, I can't look at that, and hope and hold on to the semantic structure of this theory of causation without coming to a paradox. Hence, I need a brand new theory of causation. So there are people working in this field that say, what's the causal theory in this domain, that doesn't lead to a paradox. So there's a lot of that kind of work. So you're very bright to bring this up. And, um, yeah, so so that's kind of interesting work. If you want it to actually say we're capable of it, we're capable of grasping this moving from the liminal kind of relationship to this to something more caught metacognitive that's an interesting career that, that you could use this a lot of work. But, um, yeah, so I have a chapter coming out in the meta modern reader that talks about the metaphysical problems of modernity that will never, ever, ever let you understand what Nora Bateson is talking about. You have to exit them. But if we showed up using language, like we have to show up, we use the language. And so when we so we end up with these contradictions. And so, yeah, yeah. So I like I love that work, but it's really geeky. That's how it's really highly, highly metacognitive

Nora Bateson  58:01  
And I'd love 

Jacob  58:02  
to say one thing. So that was a long answer. I wish I understood more of it. I would have to maybe Listen again. But so I think the answer is just simply this. You just need a bird book to identify the birds.

Bonnitta Roy  58:18  
Is that like semantic mapping?

Jacob  58:21  
Yeah, it's semantic mapping. Indeed.

Bonnitta Roy  58:24  
Yeah. semantic mapping. That's what I call it. You asked for a methodology? Yeah.

Jacob  58:29  
semantic mapping is rooted in ancient history or something, but we can have this conversation all the time. Thank Thanks.

Bonnitta Roy  58:34  
Yeah.

Nora Bateson  58:35  
But I think what you're onto is something really important because what could be a paradox in one context might not be a paradox in another context. So that's another issue that that is part of this, you know, parsing this out that i think it's it's worth paying attention to. And, you know, for me, there's another thing in here too. Is it a contradiction? Is it a paradox? Is it a double bind? Is it a dilemma? Right? There's all sorts of different creatures that come in this pickle bottle. And, and how each one of these, you know, sort of relational patterns of predicament have, um, they have something that is like a portal into a whole nest of relational information through multiple contexts. And in that sense, you know, it's, it's, it's important to, you know, be rigorous with the grammar for sure. But I think that what is also interesting is to play with that, that entry point into moments where what I would you know, this is why I'm interested in warm data in a nutshell, is that that which is an article, an artifact of data in one context is changed when you put it in time and when you put it in complex moving responding processes. So what the heck is information when it's moving? So So for me, the these these entry points, the pickles, the paradoxes, the double binds the dilemmas, the contradictions, the inconsistencies, um, you know, they're they, they move around and in different contexts, they they show up as different characters. So I think that's important too. But in any case, they are openings into relational information.

Bonnitta Roy  1:01:05  
Yeah. So what is a paradox in Newton, Newtonian physics you're you're, you're curious, you looking around and then you find a paradox. And that paradox dissolves in the Einsteinian paradigm. 

Nora Bateson  1:01:21  
Exactly. 

Bonnitta Roy  1:01:22  
But when you're before you get the new paradigm, your language is going to be paradoxical because you only have the language of the old paradigm. Yeah, so and then, yeah.

Ria Baeck  1:01:46  
I don't have all the sophisticated words, but how it has worked for me is like I come from a late feminist background. And so my worldview was very feminist at some point, and then there was the feminine and there was the masculine. And over time, I, I always explained it as I can expand my box. And suddenly that whole dynamic tension is gone, at least for me. And so there is that the individual and the collective and having this at certain points in my life struggle with that and learn then. So, over time, I can expand my understanding and then that paradox or whatever we call it. It's not an issue anymore because I seem to have a wider container to hold it or something. I think and that's how we move on in in understanding and probably also language. I don't know.

Peter Limberg  1:03:08  
All right, Adam, your mic is fixed.

Adam  1:03:13  
Yeah, I think so. Can you hear me now? Yep. You're good. Okay. Yeah, thank you for this. I'll just jump right into the question. We spend a lot of time thinking about or, you know, kind of rethinking how we might salvage concepts of free will, right. Like that's kind of where this conversation started. And I heard Nora and Bonnitta talk about well, maybe there's a more kind of a limited account of freewill as a kind of agency that operates within sort of different kinds of determined systems. And then kind of understanding the nature of those determined systems is some way of reclaiming agency right and as long as we're emphasizing The Free Will poll, the goal seems to be something like, Can we line up all of these internal and external variables, as best we can somehow account for them, and then then counteract them. Right? The goal seems to be we're looking for greater control, greater freedom, people use the word sovereignty, right? There's this whole work of like gaining sovereignty. And it's kind of like, like you were saying, like, you end up creating these, like very extensive maps about things that could be like controlling you so that you can control them. But I'm wondering what happens if we kind of like run the system in the other direction and, and actually think, think more clearly about like, what's, uh, this is kind of an emergent thought I'm having, as you were speaking, is there a kind of a positive version of determinism, just like we can probably identify that there's a negative version of free will. There are freely willed acts that we, frankly would wish people didn't engage in. And so I carry around, you know, these kinds of oddball concepts with me like grace, and coincidence and flow. And these are things that phenomenologically have the character of acting on me, or kind of picking me up and getting me to do things that seem to be the right things to do things that I am not sort of consciously willing and picking up on. But the agency feels like it's coming from the outside. So it has that kind of character of like falling in the determinism basket, but it doesn't feel like I'm being closed off. It doesn't have this kind of mechanically deterministic feeling to it, it doesn't feel negative. And in a lot of cases, it actually feels like by following that larger system or following that nudge, I'm actually being put to better use than whatever I as an individual would've, you know put myself to do in my own acts of making choices? So it's kind of like an intuitive nudge or inclination or something like something acting within you. That's, that's not you. And so has that character of you being determined. But it also has this like kind of, like positive quality to it. And so I'm just wondering, what do we think about that? Are we still in the language of free will and determinism here? Does it make sense to talk about this kind of grace acting inside of you as an aspect of determinism that's positive? Or is this something else should we use a different language than determinism here? And so that just kind of was shooting up as you were speaking, and so I just wanted to know what what everybody thought about that.

Ria Baeck  1:06:56  
Interesting.  I've, I've come across that I, for myself some of of the listeners know the story that at a certain point I was looking for the book that would describe what I was experiencing in groups of people and in dialogue and realize then that, oh, the book doesn't exist and probably me You have to has to write a book and that felt like something as I said, I could not not do that. And. But deterministic is for me, not the right word. And I have solved it. For lack of anything better in my book, like There seems to be a level of calling You can call it soul's calling or I guess I was the only word that came close to what I was sensing for myself. I don't know.

Because there's also something like, there is also to make a choice at that point. Like, even if I sense Oh, it's probably me to write the book. I still have to decide myself there is a choice to make to actually go there and take the consequences and take the time to invest in it and all all that they don't have that and the answer, but I think it's, it becomes more I see it as becoming More important as we move on. short version.

Bonnitta Roy  1:09:15  
So did my geeky thing um, yeah, so the I think there's several different moves that are in your question as you composed it Adam. And I think a couple of them I'm sure you're aware of it's Do I have free will? Well, who is the I right? Is it? Is it the persona? Is it myself and then I wonder about deterministic or is it the universe? Or is it let's say the universe is the whole does the whole have free will? What doesn't make sense to ask if the whole has free will? Because inside the question, very sophisticated question very limiting, limiting limiting causal framework. Because when you ask that question, you're basically adopting the collision theory of causality. My mind moves my hand by hand moves the axe what moves my mind, you're stuck in a very in a linear mental model of causality called the collision theory. So, and that's what I was trying to say earlier. It's so the paradox of freewill is a byproduct of a certain framework of causality. And so, knowing that, then when I ask, does the whole have free will I expose that because it's the whole it's the whole then nothing's gonna bump against it to make it move, right. So, so that's one thing that's interesting. And so the process Move is, is the whole creative right is their creative x, x de novo novel x in the universe. And, and then I can I can, I can work from that I can work from that and we can get brings us back to surprise and unpredictable, since my actions are completely unknowable and unpredictable, and I'm constantly surprised. The fact that I have no control means Actually I have free will if I semantically map it back to the original question. So we put these words in clusters under different mental models and then we have this pickle arise. But if you make these move and extract like, extract what context what conceptual or perceptual context the question is, is lying on you, you can see that you've fallen You've created yourself a little pickle on your end, you're asking the question within it. So if you ask it from the hole, does the hole have creativity? And that's answering that. If you map it back down, is the answer to is there free? Well, it but but we're lacking a theory of causal theory that connects that because we don't have a new causal theory.

Nora Bateson  1:12:31  
I guess that in addition to what what Ria and Benita have said here, I just want to add that I think the reason we're asking that question and that that question is so alive, in Western culture in particular, is because there is a whole sort of nest of of um ... Boy complicated complex, both, I would say, um, ways of thinking about this question of the self, and what the self can do and what the self has done, and how the self is in some way identified with it's doing and it's what has and what has been done. And in some ways, this is tied to all sorts of hero stuff. It's tied to, you know, it's tied to the way we give out prizes, and we say this, this belongs to that person or that belongs to this person. So there's, there's an awful lot in that, that that sensibility that would inquire to begin with, okay. So there's two things that I think we need to ask here one is your question, Adam, you know, or that old question right? Both of those things are there what is the difference between free will and determinism do we have either one? Do they Is it possible to have, you know, a good determinism or but then the other question I think is important is what kind of what, what does it tell us about a way of perceiving in which that question is being asked. And I think this brings us back to the beginning of the conversation that gets to that frustration around getting caught in linear solutioning. And, and we're back where we started from again and how to, you know, this thing I say it all the time be in the system of the system, and You can change the system from from within that there's this matrix sort of thing happening and not to polarize with the system because that makes it stronger, not to perpetuate it, not to prove it not to have how do you how do you where's the change? I think what we're asking is where's the change? And how can we participate in something that allows us to get to new patterns of living perceiving relating, that are less destructive? I'm hoping when I use the Royal we there the dangerous we, that that's why that this, this question is coming up. It isn't always that but I think I'm gonna stop there. But there's something about if you do something You can see that you did it. But if you don't do something, you also did something. And how to do something about the terrible destructive patterns of our socio economic cultural systems in a way that isn't riddled with so much of the blind ness of what it is that could be perceived. Right now, you know, in in Shakespearean plays, so often the characters perceived that they're going to get ahead by, they're going to get to be king if they can just kill the king. And the perception is if you kill the king, you can be the king. I'm being facetious, but but essentially, there's a perception and and getting Back to sort of where we're some of the territory we've covered, there's a causality that is perceived, there's a perceived, functioning causality. And, and if that perceived functioning causality turns out to be, let's just say limited, if not completely destructive and perpetuating of existing systems. You know, I think the question that the three of us are, I think working with is how to perceive how to be in that perception of seeing more of not all because you'll never see all but not to get caught in the goals at the wrong level. Yeah, so I think that's part of this as well.

Peter Limberg  1:17:57  
So we have what 10 minutes left might be a good time to close out. And so I want to invite Bonnitta, Nora and Rhea for any closing thoughts. Maybe we can go around the circle.

Ria Baeck  1:18:16  
Can you say something about what is happening in the Google doc and something just because I cannot do listening and looking at chat and Google Doc, but I noticed that with something happening. Good to mention that

Peter Limberg  1:18:33  
Yeah, if I can take Mike and up for that.

Michael  1:18:36  
Yeah, it kind of started off as just a series of questions related to linear thinking and nonlinear thinking and then also attempting to answer them and then just kind of pulling apart more complexity and more questions out of it. So it's, it's a little bit of a confusing map, but and then everyone started contributing about I think it's about double or triple the size than when it started? No. So I can see a lot of people still contributing, asking questions. Hard to sum it up, though.

Euvie  1:19:09  
It's kind of a nonlinear picture of

Michael  1:19:12  
nonlinear linear thinking.

Euvie  1:19:13  
Yeah.

Ria Baeck  1:19:17  
Thanks, thanks.

Bonnitta Roy  1:19:22  
I just, I just want to just bump in one other thing on the free will, because it illustrates also the notion of paradox. Because if you don't have the notion of the collision, model of cause and effect, you need to have a concept of free will. Because if there's no cause and effect, what's what is free will, you can't will something to and you no longer have the concept of determinism. So this is an example of showing that the paradox the pickle is, arises from a context of deeper context. And that is, there's an implicit causality To ask the question, so I just I just thought it was interesting that it came up and that was one of the big questions early on. Um, yeah. So what's the invitation again, Peter, for us here.

Peter Limberg  1:20:19  
closing thoughts for we make upcoming announcements.

Bonnitta Roy  1:20:25  
Yeah, I guess. We we had an intention to give people a flavor of there's a distinction between a certain type of approach that comes under systems thinking and something that we try to exemplify or share a language for you to this would be my thing as a strange attractor because people are so many people, right. Almost there. No and What kind of world would we perceive if a mass critical mass of people

lived in that paradigm?

So hopefully we gave you a taste of that or provocative.

Nora Bateson  1:21:28  
I think the only thing I I would want to also add to what rienne bernita have said and thank you. It's been wonderful to be in conversation with both of you and really delicious because it's I think it's time to actually give a kind of credibility and authorization

Bonnitta Roy  1:21:57  
to

Nora Bateson  1:22:04  
To another kind of thinking and working with systems, and I think we started off talking about that frustration. And for me that frustration has everything to do with what happens when systems thinking becomes mechanistic. And that's something vital something living is lost. And and that last thing is going to prohibit it, the kind of meta substantive, aesthetic, deep relational, and second order relational change that I think is only possible through indirect response and having said that, I want to give the caveat that even to this question of grammar and semantics, even the notion of direct and indirect could switch. So right now that thing we know as a direct corrective, I would hope and and I would suggest may some day person be perceived as a really indirect corrective. And those things that are coming in what we now perceive as indirect ways, through multiple contextual processes coming together and it comes from the outside somewhere or so, it seems that that is a much more direct way to actually be in this dance or this interplay with complex systems. So, for me, I think what I want to do since I have these beautiful people here to say it with me as I just want to, I just want to give credibility to that because more often than not, it's Isn't there isn't credibility there? And without that credibility, I don't know how we can begin to move into another. Another texture, another depth, another rigor of systems thinking.

Ria Baeck  1:24:23  
Yeah. Nice to meet you, Nora. I've seen your ones but that was a long time ago. And I also want to name the audience here.

Although I haven't followed

the chat because that's too confusing for me, but

that's part of the complexity. It was not just the three of us talking. There was a lot, lot lot lot more going on all kinds of levels and

Unknown Speaker  1:24:59  
it would

Unknown Speaker  1:25:01  
Yeah,

Ria Baeck  1:25:03  
I just talked yesterday with Bonnie like, how can we design this that even that complexity and the intelligence that because it's not just Bonnie and Nora and I, who are the ones who know here, that's really bullshit. And for me that's part of actually embodying complexity is like trusting the collective wisdom and looking for

ways that we can maybe need to invent to

get more of that, or to I don't know. That's what I'm leaving with are inspired by the conversation yesterday with Bonnie like

can we do

Whatever the ripple effect is of this,

maybe somehow we can

activate it more or something. I don't know.

That's me. Thank you for the invitation.

Peter Limberg  1:26:24  
All right, so we'll close here. I'll make a few announcements, but first, Benita, Nora, Maria, thank you so much for that beautiful and delicious conversation. I would love to have you back for another emergent conversation. If you'd like to continue this we have a discord now. Here's an invitation for it. And I think I'll take it as advice and have these like post sensemaking sessions that kind of Daniel Thorson does with his podcast so we can kind of make sense of this and embody it. And thanks for Mike for up for giving that idea with the Google Doc live. That's pretty awesome. I think I'll incorporate that the stoah So in upcoming events in 15 minutes here, we have a bio motive framework with Doug pattern. It's a really interesting psychotherapeutic modality that really gets to the heart and the mind 30 minute test or teaser of it, so Doug's gonna come in and do a demo live. So check that out. That's the direct zoom link. We have sensemaking residence series, Dave Snowden, who was mentioned here a few times he's coming in. He's there sensemaking residence for September. It's naturalizing sensemaking. You can check that out the website we need to ROI you have one you want to go and plug that the hollow for October.

Bonnitta Roy  1:27:40  
Yeah, so the hollow is in The Legend of Sleepy Hollow hollow is a wooded riverine secret place where people would come to coast conspire around change in the world and it's apropos to the upcoming Halloween. So yeah, so Let's meet there in the hollow and become secret agents of change.

Peter Limberg  1:28:09  
Yeah, I'm really excited about that one that's an October Fridays at 10am. Eastern Time for someone that I would just check the website. And we just post a new event that Brett Weinstein is coming in in September 21 at 6pm, eastern time to talk about his unique nudity, like 2020 project. So if you have any questions for him to stress, test it, feel free to come there. And of course, a Ria, Bach has a session every Friday at 12pm, eastern time on collective presencing. So if you want to actually engage in these type of conversations with us here at the stoah you can go on our screen the website. And if you'd like to support the stuff that we're doing here, with all these kind of free activities during this meta crisis, meaning crisis, you can support us on Patreon. The link is in the chat. Right so everyone, thank you so much for coming up. today

Bonnitta Roy  1:29:03  
thank you so much Peter, Nora and Maria

